CHAPTER THREEChestThe chest radiograph is one of the most commonly obtained examinations in pediatric imaging.
It is also the examination most likely to beencountered by radiology residents, pediatricresidents, general radiologists, and pediatricians.
herefore, topics such as chest imaging in neonates and the evaluation of suspected pneumonia are discussed in detail.
Causes of respiratory distress in newborn infantscan be divided into those that are secondary todiffuse pulmonary disease (medical causes) andthose that are secondary to a space-occupyingmass compressing the pulmonary parenchyma(surgical causes).
iffuse Pulmonary Diseasein the NewbornDiffuse pulmonary disease causes respiratorydistress much more commonly than surgical diseases, particularly in premature infants, whomake up the majority of cases of respiratory distress in the newborn.
A simple way to evaluatethese patients and try to offer a limited differential diagnosis is to evaluate the lung volumes andto characterize the pulmonary opacities.
ung volumes can be categorized as high,normal, or low.
Normally, the apex of the domeof the diaphragm is expected to be at the level ofapproximately the tenth posterior rib.
Lung opacity, if present, can be characterized as streaky,perihilar (central) densities that have a linearquality or as diffuse, granular opacities thathave an almost sandlike character.
Classically,cases fall into one of the following two categories: (1) cases with high lung volumes andstreaky perihilar densities and (2) cases withlow lung volumes and granular opacities(Table 3-1).
This is more of a guideline, ratherthan a rule, because many neonates with diffusepulmonary disease have normal lung volumes.
he differential diagnosis for cases with highlung volumes and streaky perihilar densitiesincludes meconium aspiration, transient tachypnea of the newborn, and neonatal pneumonia.
ost of the neonates in this group are term.
Thedifferential for cases with low lung volumes andgranular opacities includes surfactant deficiencyand b-hemolytic streptococcal pneumonia.
Mostof these neonates are premature.
econium Aspiration SyndromeMeconium aspiration syndrome results fromintrapartum or intrauterine aspiration of meconium.
It usually occurs secondary to stress, such ashypoxia, and more often occurs in term or postmature neonates.
The aspirated meconiumcauses both obstruction of small airways secondary to its tenacious nature and also chemicalpneumonitis.
The degree of respiratory failurecan be severe.
Radiographic findings includehyperinflation (high lung volumes), which maybe asymmetric and patchy, and asymmetriclung densities that tend to have a ropy appearance and a perihilar distribution (Fig.
3-1).
ommonly there are areas of hyperinflationalternating with areas of atelectasis.
Pleural effusions can be present.
Because of the smallairway obstruction by the meconium, air-blockcomplications are common, with pneumothoraxoccurring in 20% to 40% of cases.
Meconiumaspiration syndrome is relatively common;25,000 to 30,000 cases occur in the UnitedStates annually.
ransient Tachypnea ofthe NewbornTransient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) isalso referred to by a variety of other names,including wet lung disease and transient respiratory distress.
It occurs secondary to delayedclearance of fetal lung fluid.
Physiologically,the clearing of fetal lung fluid is facilitated bythe ‘‘thoracic squeeze’’ during vaginal deliveries;therefore, most cases of TTN are related to26cesarean section in which the thoracic squeezeis bypassed.
Other causes include maternal diabetes and maternal sedation.
The hallmark ofTTN is a benign course.
Respiratory distressdevelops by 6 hours of age, peaks at 1 day ofage, and is resolved by 2 to 3 days.
There is aspectrum of radiographic findings similar tothose seen with mild to severe pulmonaryedema.
There is a combination of airspace opacification, coarse interstitial markings, prominentand indistinct pulmonary vasculature, fluid inthe fissures, pleural effusion, and cardiomegaly(Fig.
3-2).
Lung volumes are normal to increased.
eonatal PneumoniaNeonatal pneumonia can be caused by a largenumber of infectious agents that can be acquiredintrauterine, during birth, or soon after birth.
ith the exception of b-hemolytic streptococcalpneumonia, which will be discussed separately, the radiographic appearance of neonatalpneumonia is that of patchy, asymmetric perihilar densities and hyperinflation (Fig.
3-3).
Pleuraleffusions may be present (Fig.
3-4).
Such casesof neonatal pneumonia may have a similarradiographic appearance to and be indistinguishable from meconium aspiration syndromewhen using imaging alone.
urfactant-Deficient DiseaseSurfactant-deficient disease (SDD; also referredto as respiratory distress syndrome or hyalinemembrane disease) is a common disorder, withapproximately 40,000 new cases annually in theUnited States.
It is primarily a disease of premature infants, affecting up to 50% of them, and itis the most common cause of death in live newborns.
SDD is related to the inability of premature type II pneumocytes to produce surfactant.
ormally, surfactant coats the alveolar surfacesand decreases surface tension, allowing for thealveoli to remain open.
As a result of the lack ofsurfactant, there is alveolar collapse, resulting innoncompliant lungs.
The radiographic findingsreflect these pathologic changes (Fig.
3-5A, B).
ABLE 3-1.
Differential Diagnosis of Diffuse Pulmonary Disease in theNewbornHigh lung volumes, streakyperihilar densitiesLow lung volumes,granular opacitiesMeconium aspiration syndromeTransient tachypnea of the newbornNeonatal pneumoniaSurfactant deficiencyb-hemolytic streptococcal pneumoniaFIGURE 3-1.
Meconium aspiration syndrome.
Newborn chestradiograph shows normal to large lung volumes, increased perihilar markings, and bilateral, coarse, ropy markings.
Note rightpleural effusion (arrow).
IGURE 3-2.
Transient tachypnea of the newborn.
Newbornchest radiograph shows normal lung volumes, cardiomegaly,indistinct pulmonary vascularity, and fluid in the minor fissure(arrow).
Within 24 hours the patient was asymptomatic.
hest • 27Lung volumes are low.
There are bilateral granular opacities that represent collapsed alveoliinterspersed with open alveoli.
Because thelarger bronchi do not collapse, there are prominent air bronchograms.
When the process issevere enough and the majority of alveoli arecollapsed, there may be coalescence of the granular opacities, resulting in diffuse lung opacity.
IGURE 3-3.
Neonatal pneumonia.
Newborn chest radiographshows large lung volumes and coarse, bilateral perihilarmarkings.
IGURE 3-4.
Neonatal pneumonia.
Newborn chest radiographshows large lung volumes and coarse, bilateral perihilar markings.
Note right pleural effusion (arrow).
Also note umbilicalvenous catheter with tip into right atrium.
Tip should be at thejunction of the right atrium and inferior vena cava.
FIGURE 3-5.
Surfactant-deficient disease responding to surfactanttherapy.
A, Radiograph shortly after birth shows low lungvolumes, confluent densities, and prominent air bronchograms.
ote the umbilical venous catheter (arrow) with tip in intrahepatic intravenous catheter.
B, Radiograph obtained immediatelyfollowing surfactant administration shows increased lungvolumes and decreased lung opacities.
The umbilical venouscatheter was removed in the interim.
Note the umbilicalvenous catheter (arrow) in ‘‘low’’-type position, with tip at L4.
8 • Pediatric Imaging: The FundamentalsA normal film at 6 hours of age excludes thepresence of SDD.
urfactant Replacement TherapyOne of the therapies for SDD is surfactantadministration.
Surfactant can be administeredvia nebulized or aerosol forms.
It is administeredinto the trachea via a catheter or an adaptedendotracheal tube.
The administration of surfactant in neonates with SDD has been shown to beassociated with decreased oxygen and ventilatorsetting requirements, decreased air-block complications, decreased incidence of intracranialhemorrhage and bronchopulmonary dysplasia,and decreased death rate.
However, there is anassociated increased risk for development ofpatent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary hemorrhage, and there can be an acute desaturationepisode in response to surfactant administration.
urfactant administration can be given on arescue basis when premature neonates developrespiratory distress or can be given prophylactically in premature infants who are at risk.
rophylactic administration is commonly givenimmediately after birth and is becoming a morecommon practice.
In response to surfactantadministration, radiography may demonstratecomplete, central, or asymmetric clearing ofthe findings of SDD (see Fig.
3-5).
There is usually an increase in lung volumes.
Neonateswithout radiographic findings of a response tosurfactant have poorer prognoses than thosewho have radiographic evidence of a response.
 pattern of alternating distended and collapsedacini may create a radiographic pattern of bubblelike lucencies that can mimic pulmonaryinterstitial emphysema.
Knowledge of whensurfactant has been administered is helpfulin rendering accurate interpretation of chestradiographs taken in the neonatal intensivecare unit (NICU).
-Hemolytic StreptococcalPneumoniab-hemolytic (group B) streptococcal pneumoniais the most common type of pneumonia in neonates.
The infection is acquired during birth, andat least 25% of women in labor are colonized bythe organism.
Premature infants are more commonly infected than are term infants.
In contrastto the other types of neonatal pneumonias, theradiographic findings include bilateral granularopacities and low lung volumes (Fig.
3-6), theidentical findings in surfactant-deficient disease.
he presence of pleural fluid is a helpful differentiating factor because it is very uncommon insurfactant deficiency but has been reported inbetween 25% and 67% of cases of b-hemolyticstreptococcal pneumonia.
ersistent Pulmonary Hypertensionin the NeonatePersistent pulmonary hypertension in the neonate, also referred to as persistent fetal circulation, is a term often used in the NICU and isaddressed here because it can be a source ofconfusion.
The high pulmonary vascular resistance that is normally present in the fetus typically decreases during the newborn period.
hen this fails to happen, the pulmonary pressures remain abnormally high, and the conditionis referred to as persistent pulmonary hypertension.
It is a physiologic finding rather than a specific disease.
It can be a primary phenomenon orit can occur secondary to causes of hypoxia,such as meconium aspiration syndrome, neonatal pneumonia, or pulmonary hypoplasia associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
hese patients are quite ill.
The radiographicpatterns are variable and are more oftenFIGURE.
3-6.
b-Hemolytic streptococcal pneumonia.
Radiographshows low lung volumes and diffuse granular opacities, similarin appearance to cases of surfactant deficiency.
hest • 29reflective of the underlying cause of hypoxiathan the presence of persistent pulmonaryhypertension.
eonatal Intensive Care UnitSupport ApparatusOne of the primary roles of chest radiography inthe NICU is to monitor support apparatus.
Theyinclude endotracheal tubes, enteric tubes, centralvenous lines, umbilical arterial and venous catheters, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation(ECMO) catheters.
The radiographic evaluationof many of these tubes is the same as that seenin adults and is not discussed here.
When evaluating the positions of endotracheal tubes in premature neonates, it is important to consider thatthe length of the entire tracheamay be only about1 cm.
Keeping the endotracheal tube in the exactcenter of such a small trachea is an impossibletask for caregivers, and phone calls and reportssuggesting that the tube needs to be moved 2mmproximally may be more annoying than helpful.
irect phone communication may be moreappropriately reserved for times when the tubeis in a main bronchus or above the thoracic inlet.
here is an increased propensity to use esophageal intubation in neonates compared to its use inadults.
Although it would seem that esophagealintubation would be incredibly obvious clinically, this is not always the case.
I have seencases in which a child has in retrospect been discovered to have been esophageally intubated formore than 24 hours.
Therefore, the radiologistmay be the first to recognize esophageal intubation.
Obviously, when the course of the endotracheal tube does not overlie the path of thetrachea, the use of esophageal intubation isfairly obvious.
Other findings of esophagealintubation include a combination of low lungvolumes, gas within the esophagus, and gaseousdistention of the bowel (Fig.
3-7).
mbilical Arterial and VenousCathetersUmbilical arterial and venous catheters are commonly used in the NICU.
Umbilical arterialcatheters pass from the umbilicus inferiorlyinto the pelvis via the umbilical artery to theiliac artery.
The catheters then turn cephaladwithin the aorta (see Fig.
3-5).
These catheterscan be associated with thrombosis of the aortaand its branches.
Therefore, it is important toavoid positioning the catheter with the tip atthe level of the branches of the aorta (celiac,superior mesenteric, and renal arteries).
Thereare two acceptable umbilical arterial catheterpositions: high lines have their tips at the levelof the descending thoracic aorta (T8-T10; seeFig.
3-9); low lines have their tips below thelevel of L3 (see Fig.
3-5).
The catheter tipshould not be positioned between T10 and L3because of the risk for major arterial thrombosis.
here is no clear consensus as to whether a highor a low umbilical artery catheter line is better,and both positions are still currently used.
he pathway of the umbilical venous catheter is umbilical vein to left portal vein to ductusvenosus to hepatic vein to inferior vena cava(Fig.
3-8).
In contrast to umbilical arterial catheters, the course is in the superior direction fromthe level of the umbilicus.
The ideal positionof an umbilical venous catheter is with its tipat the junction of the right atrium and the inferiorvena cava at the level of the hemidiaphragmFIGURE 3-7.
Esophageal intubation in a 6-day-old girl.
Chestradiograph obtained after reintubation shows the endotrachealtube overlying the expected location of the midtrachea.
owever, there are low lung volumes, gas within the esophagus(arrows), and multiple air-filled and distended bowel loops.
0 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentals(see Figs.
3-4, 3-5).
The umbilical venous catheter may occasionally deflect into the portalvenous system rather than passing into theductus venosus.
Complications of such positioning can include hepatic hematoma or abscess.
eripherally Inserted CentralCatheters in ChildrenOne of the more common lines now seen inchildren, as in adults, is peripherally insertedcentral catheters (PICCs).
In contrast to adults,in whom some of the PICCs can be as large as6F, the PICC lines used in children, particularlyinfants, are often small in caliber (2F or 3F) sothat they can be placed into their very smallperipheral veins.
These small caliber PICCs canbe very difficult to see on chest radiography, sosome of them must be filled with contrast to beaccurately visualized.
The tip of the PICC linethat enters the child from the upper extremityor scalp should be positioned with the tip inthe midlevel of the superior vena cava (seeFig.
3-27).
It is essential that PICC lines not beleft in place with the tip well into the rightatrium.
Particularly with the small-caliber lines,the atrium can be lacerated, leading to pericardial tamponade, free hemorrhage, or death.
any such cases have been reported nationally.
lso, the PICC should not be too proximal in thesuperior vena cava because the distal portion ofthe line can flip from the superior vena cava intothe contralateral brachiocephalic or jugular vein.
t Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center,the PICC lines are inserted in a dedicated interventional radiology suite by a team of nurses,with supervision by pediatric interventional radiologists.
Ultrasound is often used to guide veincannulation and certified Child Life Specialistscoach most kids through the procedure withouthaving to sedate them.
Fluoroscopy is utilized atthe end of the procedure to adjust and document tip position in the mid-superior vena cava.
ECMO is a last-resort therapy usually reservedfor respiratory failure that has not responded toother treatments.
ECMO is essentially a prolonged form of circulatory bypass of the lungsand is used only in patients who have reversibledisease and a chance for survival.
The majorityof neonates who are treated with ECMO haverespiratory failure as a result of meconiumaspiration, persistent pulmonary hypertension(resulting from a variety of causes), severe congenital heart disease, or congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
ECMO seems to be used lesscommonly now than it was in the 1990s.
here are two types of ECMO: arteriovenousand venovenous.
In ateriovenous ECMO, theright common carotid artery and internal jugularveins are sacrificed.
The arterial catheter isplaced via the carotid and positioned with itstip overlying the aortic arch.
The venous catheter is positioned with its tip over the right atrium(Fig.
3-9).
One of the main roles of a chest radiograph of children on ECMO is to detect anypotential migration of the catheters.
Carefulcomparison with previous studies to make surethat the catheters are not coming out or movingtoo far in is critical.
These patients have manybandages and other items covering the externalportions of the catheters, so migration may behard to detect on physical examination.
Notethat there are various radiographic appearancesof the ECMO catheters.
Some catheters endwhere the radiopaque portion of the tubeends, and others have a radiolucent portionwith a small metallic marker at the tip (see Fig.
-9).
It is common to see white-out of the lungssoon after a patient is placed on ECMO asa result of decreased ventilator settings andFIGURE 3-8.
Anatomy of the course of the umbilical vein (UV)catheter as demonstrated by contrast injection of umbilical catheter performed because of inability to advance UV catheter.
ote course of umbilical vein to portal vein to ductus venosus(DV; arrow).
LPV, left portal vein; RPV, right portal vein.
hest • 31third-space shifting of fluid (see Fig.
3-9).
atients on ECMO are anticoagulated and aretherefore at risk for hemorrhage.
ypes of Ventilation:High-Frequency Oscillator vs.
onventional VentilationHigh-frequency oscillators are commonly usedto treat neonates in the NICU.
In contrast to conventional ventilation, high-frequency oscillatorsuse supraphysiologic rates of ventilation withvery low tidal volumes.
Conventional ventilationhas been likened to delivering a cupful of airapproximately 20 times a minute.
In contrast,high-frequency oscillation is like delivering athimbleful of air approximately 1000 times perminute.
The air is vibrated in and out of the lung.
he mechanism of oscillators is poorly understood.
In conventional ventilation, the diaphragm moves up and down, whereas duringhigh-frequency ventilation the diaphragm staysparked at a certain anatomic level.
This level canbe adjusted by changing the mean airway pressure of the oscillator.
Caregivers usually like tomaintain the diaphragm at approximately thelevel of the 10th posterior ribs.
In general, theradiographic appearance of neonatal pulmonarydiseases is not affected by whether the patientis being ventilated by conventional or highfrequency ventilation.
omplications in the NeonatalIntensive Care UnitAs in adult intensive care units, major complications detected by chest radiographs includethose related to air-block complications, lobarcollapse, or acute diffuse pulmonary consolidation.
Another type of complication seen in neonates is the development of bronchopulmonarydysplasia.
Imaging findings of lobar collapse andair-block complications such as pneumothorax,pneumomediastinum, and pneumopericardiumare similar in neonates and in adults.
One typeof air-block complication that is unique to neonates is pulmonary interstitial emphysema.
ulmonary Interstitial EmphysemaIn patients with severe surfactant deficiency,ventilatory support can result in markedincreases in alveolar pressure, leading to perforation of alveoli.
The air that escapes into theadjacent interstitium and lymphatics is referredto as pulmonary interstitial emphysema (PIE).
IE appears on radiographs as bubblelike orlinear lucencies and can be focal or diffuse(Fig.
3-10).
The involved lung is usually noncompliant and is seen to have a static volumeon multiple consecutive films.
The finding is typically transient.
The importance of detecting PIEis that it serves as a warning sign for otherimpending air-block complications such aspneumothorax, and its presence can influencecaregivers in decisions such as switching fromconventional to high-frequency ventilation.
t can be difficult to differentiate diffuse PIEfrom the bubblelike lucencies that are associatedwith developing bronchopulmonary dysplasia.
hen encountering this scenario, the patient’sage can help to determine which is morelikely.
Most cases of PIE occur in the first weekFIGURE 3-9.
ECMO catheter placement for meconium aspiration syndrome (same child as in Fig.
3-1).
Note venousECMO catheter (VC) has a radiopaque proximal portion anda lucent distal portion.
The tip of the venous catheter is markedby a small radiopaque metallic marker (arrow) and is actually inthe right atrium.
Note the arterial ECMO catheter (AC) with tipin region of aortic arch.
Also, note ‘‘high’’-type umbilical arterialcatheter with tip overlying descending aorta at the level of T8.
2 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalsof life, a time at which bronchopulmonary dysplasia is very unlikely.
In patients older than2 weeks, bronchopulmonary dysplasia is morelikely.
Also, in patients who have undergone aseries of daily films, PIE may be noted to occurabruptly, whereas bronchopulmonary dysplasiatends to occur gradually.
As previously mentioned, SDD partially treated by surfactantreplacement can cause a pattern of lucenciesthat may mimic PIE as well.
arely, PIE can persist and develop into anexpansive, multicystic mass.
The air cysts canbecome large enough to cause mediastinalshift and compromise pulmonary function.
ften, the diagnosis is indicated by sequentialradiography showing evolution of the cysticmass from original findings typical of PIE.
Inunclear cases, CT demonstrates that the aircysts are in the interstitial space by showingthe bronchovascular bundles being positionedwithin the center of the air cysts.
The bronchovascular bundles appear as linear or nodulardensities in the center of the cysts.
auses of Acute Diffuse PulmonaryConsolidationAcute diffuse pulmonary consolidation is nonspecific in neonates, as it is in adults, and canrepresent blood, pus, or water.
In the neonate,the specific considerations include edema,which may be secondary to the developmentof patent ductus arteriosus (Fig.
3-11); pulmonary hemorrhage, to which surfactant therapypredisposes; worsening surfactant deficiency(during the first several days of life but notlater); or developing neonatal pneumonia(Table 3-2).
Diffuse microatelectasis is anotherpossibility because neonates have the propensity to artifactually demonstrate diffuse lungopacity on low lung volume films (expiratorytechnique; Fig.
3-12A.
B); this should not be mistaken for another cause of consolidation.
Suchradiographs showing low lung volumes offerlittle information concerning the pulmonarystatus of the patient and should be repeatedwhen clinically indicated.
FIGURE 3-10.
Pulmonary interstitial emphysema in a prematureinfant with congenital heart disease.
Chest radiograph showsasymmetric bubblelike lucencies within the left upper lobe consistent with PIE.
Note left pneumothorax (arrow) and rightupper lobe collapse (RUL).
FIGURE 3-11.
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) leading to congestive heart failure in a 1-week-old premature neonate.
A, Prior todevelopment of PDA, radiograph shows normal-sized heart andclear lungs; B, After development of PDA, radiograph showscardiac enlargement and bilateral lung consolidation.
hest • 33Bronchopulmonary DysplasiaBronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is alsoreferred to as chronic lung disease of prematurity.
It is a common complication seen in premature infants and is associated with significantmorbidity rates.
It is uncommon in childrenborn at greater than 32 weeks of gestationalage, but it occurs in more than 50% of prematureinfants born at less than 1000 g.
BPD is the mostcommon chronic lung disease of infancy.
PD is related to injury to the lungs thatis thought to result from some combination ofmechanical ventilation and oxygen toxicity.
lthough four discrete and orderly stages ofthe development of BPD were originallydescribed, they are not seen commonly andare probably not important to know.
BPD typically occurs in a premature infant who requiresprolonged ventilator support.
At approximatelythe end of the second week of life, persistenthazy density appears throughout the lungs.
ver the next weeks to months, a combinationof coarse lung markings, bubblelike lucencies,and asymmetric aeration can develop (Fig.
-13).
Eventually, focal lucencies, coarse reticular densities, and bandlike opacities develop.
n childhood survivors of BPD, many of theseradiographic findings decrease in prominenceover the years and only hyperaeration may persist.
The radiographic findings may completelyresolve.
Clinically, many children with severeBPD during infancy may eventually improveto normal pulmonary function or may onlyhave minor persistent problems such as exercise intolerance, predisposition to infection, orasthma.
ilson-Mikity syndrome is a confusing andcontroversial term.
It refers to the developmentof BPD in the absence of mechanical ventilation.
ome people debate whether this disease exists,whereas others think it is a variant of BPD.
ertainly, there are cases in which BPD findingsdevelop with minimal ventilator support ordevelop earlier than is typically expected.
ocal Pulmonary Lesionsin the NewbornIn contrast to diffuse pulmonary disease in newborns, focal masses can present with respiratorydistress due to compression of otherwise normallung.
Most of these focal masses are related tocongenital lung lesions.
Congenital lung lesionsmay appear solid, as air-filled cysts, or mixedin appearance.
The differential for a focal lunglesion can be separated on the basis of whetherthe lesion is lucent or solid appearing onchest radiography (Table 3-3).
The most likelyTABLE 3-2.
Causes of Acute DiffusePulmonary Consolidation in NeonatesEdema: patent ductus arteriosusHemorrhageDiffuse microatelectasis: artifactWorsening surfactant deficiency (only during first days oflife)PneumoniaFIGURE 3-12.
Expiratory chest radiograph mimicking heart failure in infant.
A, Initial radiograph shows prominent size ofcardiothymic silhouette, indistinctness of pulmonary vascularity,and low lung volumes.
B, Repeat radiograph obtained immediately after A shows clear lungs and normal heart size.
4 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalsconsiderations for a lucent chest lesion in a newborn are congenital lobar emphysema, congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation, persistentpulmonary interstitial emphysema, and congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
CT may be helpfulin differentiating among these lesions bydemonstrating whether the abnormal lucencyis related to air in distended alveoli, in theinterstitium, or in abnormal cystic structures.
esions that typically appear solid during theneonatal period include sequestration and bronchogenic cyst.
Many of these lesions can presentin children beyond the neonatal period,and those aspects of these entities are also discussed here.
he following sections are divided into specific congenital lesions.
However, it has beenincreasingly recognized that there can be‘‘mixed’’ lesions, which show characteristics ofmore than one type of lesions (see Fig.
3-16).
he most common mixed lesions are thosethat show characteristics of both congenitalcystic adenomatoid malformation andsequestration.
t is also worth mentioning that there hasbeen a change in the way these lesions presentthat is related to the increased use of prenatalultrasound and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging.
Historically, congenital lung lesions wereidentified only when the infant became symptomatic.
Many, if not most, of the congenital lunglesions we currently see are picked up and followed through fetal life, with additional postnatal imaging obtained shortly after birth.
Asignificant number of these children are asymptomatic.
This has raised issues related to whenand whether to perform surgical treatment ininfants with asymptomatic lesions.
ongenital Lobar EmphysemaCongenital lobar emphysema is related to overexpansion of alveoli, but the mechanism isdebated.
Some reports suggest a ball-valvetype of anomaly in the bronchus leading to theaffected lung, which causes progressive air trapping.
Most cases present with respiratory distressduring the neonatal period; 50% present withinthe first month, and 75% present within the first6 months of life.
There can be associatedFIGURE 3-13.
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia in a premature neonatal girl.
A, Chest radiograph at 14 days of life shows persistentbilateral lung opacities.
B, Chest radiograph at 20 days of lifeshows coarsening of the lung markings.
C, Chest radiograph at28 days of life shows increased coarse lung markings and development of diffuse bubblelike lucencies.
ABLE 3-3.
Focal Lung Lesions in Neonates on RadiographyLucent Lesions Solid LesionsCongenital lobar emphysemaCongenital cystic adenomatoid malformationPersistent pulmonary interstitial emphysemaCongenital diaphragmatic herniaSequestrationBronchogenic cystCongenital cystic adenomatoidmalformationChest • 35anomalies, usually cardiac, but they occur in theminority of patients with congenital lobaremphysema.
There is a lobar predilection; themost common site is the left upper lobe (43%),followed by the right middle lobe (35%) andright lower lobe (21%), with less than 1% ineach of the other lobes.
On chest radiography,a hyperlucent, hyperexpanded lobe is seen(Fig.
3-14A, B).
On initial radiographs, thelesion may appear to be a soft tissue densitybecause of retained fetal lung fluid.
This densityresolves and is replaced by progressive hyperlucency.
On CT, the air is in the alveoli, so theinterstitial septa and bronchovascular bundlesare at the periphery (not the center) of thelucency (see Fig.
3-14).
The air spaces arelarger than those in the adjacent normal lung,and the pulmonary vessels appear attenuated.
he treatment is lobectomy.
ongenital Cystic AdenomatoidMalformationCongenital cystic adenomatoid malformation(CCAM) is a congenital adenomatoid proliferation that replaces normal alveoli.
The majorityare detected prenatally or are present with respiratory distress at birth.
Most involve only onelobe and, in contrast to congenital lobar emphysema, there is no lobar predilection.
CCAMs aredivided into three types on the basis of howlarge the cysts appear at imaging or pathology.
ype 1 lesions (50%) have one or more large(2 to 10 cm) cysts.
Type 2 lesions (40%) havenumerous small cysts of uniform size.
Type 3lesions (10%) appear solid on gross inspectionand imaging but have microscopic cysts.
Thereare some who are now advocating the nomenclature congenital pulmonary airway malformation and a new classification with five subtypes.
ho are these people and don’t they have anything better to do?The classification system has no clinical relevance except that it helps us remember thatCCAM can have multiple appearances whenimaged.
The imaging appearance reflects thetype.
CCAMs communicate with the bronchialtree at birth and therefore fill with air withinthe first hours to days of life.
On radiographyand CT, a completely cystic, mixed cystic andsolid, or completely solid mass is seen depending on the number and size of cysts and whetherthose cysts contain air or fluid (Figs.
3-15A-C,3-16A-C).
The management of symptomaticCCAM is surgical resection.
The managementof asymptomatic CCAM is currently somewhatcontroversial.
However, most caregivers advocate elective resection because these lesionsare at increased risk for infection and, rarely,may develop malignancy.
 scenario encountered with increasing frequency is a prenatally diagnosed lung mass thatbecomes less prominent on serial prenatal ultrasounds or MR examinations and demonstratesonly subtle findings or is not detected on achest radiograph obtained soon after birth.
FIGURE 3-14.
Congenital lobar emphysema.
A, Radiographobtained at 1 day of age shows diffuse lucency and enlargementof left upper lobe (arrows).
B, CT scan shows hyperlucent andenlarged left upper lobe with asymmetric attenuation of vascularstructures and increased space between interstitial septa.
6 • Pediatric Imaging: The FundamentalsAlmost all such lesions are type 2 CCAMs anddemonstrate abnormalities on CT, even in lightof a normal chest radiograph.
any CCAMs identified prenatally are followed with MR imaging (see Fig.
3-15), andmuch has been learned about the nature ofthese lesions.
CCAMs tend to increase in sizeuntil approximately 25 weeks of gestation.
Themass of the CCAMs then tends to regress overtime, sometimes dramatically.
Compression ofthe contralateral lung by a large mass anddevelopment of fetal hydrops are associatedwith high mortality rates.
Fetal interventionis typically reserved for cases with hydrops;management options include dominant cystaspiration and fetal surgery with resectionof the lesion.
Recently, trials using maternalsteroids have shown promise in shrinkingthe CCAM volumes and avoiding otherinterventions.
ongenital Diaphragmatic HerniaCongenital diaphragmatic hernias (CDHs) areusually secondary to posterior defects in thediaphragm (Bochdalek hernia) and are morecommon on the left side by a ratio of 5 to 1.
ost infants with CDHs present at birth withsevere respiratory distress.
The hernia may contain stomach, small bowel, colon, or liver.
he radiographic appearance depends on thehernia contents and on whether there is airwithin the herniated viscera.
On initial radiographs, prior to the introduction of air into theviscera, the appearance may be radiopaque.
FIGURE 3-15.
Type 1 congenital cystic adenomatoidmalformation.
A, Coronal fetal MR image showshyperexpanded, high-signal lesion (arrows) in leftlobe.
Note lower signal in normal right lung (R).
, Chest radiograph after birth shows lucent, multicystic lesion in left lung with rightward mediastinalshift.
C, CT soon after birth shows large, lucent,multicystic lesion in left lung.
hest • 37Later, and more commonly, the herniated viscera contain air and the hernia appears as anair-containing cystic mass.
Less air-filledviscera in the abdomen than expected andan abnormal position of support apparatus,such as a nasogastric tube within a herniatedstomach, are obvious clues that support thediagnosis (Fig.
3-17).
Often a nasogastric tubebecomes lodged at the esophagogastric junctionbecause of the acute turn in the herniatedstomach.
This can be a supportive finding ofthe diagnosis.
he diagnosis of CDH is commonly madeprenatally by ultrasound and further evaluatedby fetal MR imaging (Fig.
3-18A, B).
The mortality rate for CDH is related to the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia.
Systems of calculatinglung volumes and predicting mortality havebeen devised for use with fetal ultrasound,fetal MR imaging, and postnatal radiography.
adiographic predictors of poor prognosesinclude lack of aerated ipsilateral lung, low percentage of aerated contralateral lung, and severemediastinal shift.
Treatment includes support ofrespiratory failure, often by high-frequency ventilation or ECMO and surgical repair.
Thereported mortality rates associated with CDHrange from 12% to 50%.
One factor contributingto mortality is the presence of associatedabnormalities, which are reported in a high percentage of infants born with CDH.
One reportsuggests that as many as 50% of patients withCDH have associated congenital heart disease.
y the nature of the herniated bowel into thechest, most patients with CDH have associatedmalrotation.
FIGURE 3-16.
Mixed lesion with components of bothCCAM and sequestration seen at pathology.
A, Chestradiograph obtained for multiple infections in youngchild shows bandlike opacity (arrow) in left lower lobe.
t had been present on multiple radiographs.
B, CT scanshows multicystic, air-filled lesion (arrow) in left lowerlobe, suggestive of CCAM.
C, CT reformat shows systemicarterial feeder (F) arising from aorta (A) and extending intolesion.
Findings are characteristic of sequestration.
Notedraining pulmonary vein (V).
8 • Pediatric Imaging: The FundamentalsSequestrationThe term pulmonary sequestration refers to anarea of congenital abnormal pulmonary tissuethat does not have a normal connection to thebronchial tree.
The characteristic imaging feature of sequestration is the demonstration ofan anomalous arterial supply to the abnormallung via a systemic artery arising from theaorta (Fig.
3-19A-C).
All modalities that candemonstrate this abnormal systemic arterialsupply, including MR imaging, helical CT, ultrasound, and arteriography, have been advocated in making the diagnosis of sequestration.
owever, contrast-enhanced helical CT is preferred because it both visualizes the systemicarterial supply when a sequestration is present(see Fig.
3-19) and further characterizes thelung abnormality if a sequestration is notpresent.
equestration most commonly presents withrecurrent pneumonia, usually in late childhood.
ther presentations include a prenatally diagnosed lung mass or respiratory distress in thenewborn period.
Because sequestrations donot communicate with the bronchial treeunless they become infected, they usuallyappear as radiopaque masses during the neonatal period.
After infection has occurred, air maybe introduced and sequestration may appear asa multiloculated cystic mass.
The most commonlocation is within the left lower lobe.
here has been much discussion concerning differentiation between intralobar and extralobar sequestrations.
Extralobar sequestrationshave a separate pleural covering, whereas intralobar sequestrations, which are more common,do not; however, the presence or absence of anextrapleural covering cannot be determinedat imaging.
Extralobar sequestrations are associated with other abnormalities in 65% ofFIGURE 3-17.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
Radiographshows stomach (S) containing tip of nasogastric tube (arrow)in left hemithorax.
There is no visualized aerated bowel in theupper abdomen.
There is mediastinal shift to the right.
ontralateral lung is well-aerated.
FIGURE 3-18.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
A, Fetal MRimage in coronal plane shows high signal content in multiplebowel loops (arrows) in left hemithorax.
B, Chest radiographafter birth shows multiple bubblelike lucencies in left hemithorax.
Note that in this case the stomach and nasogastric tubetip are not in the hernia.
There is mediastinal shift to theright.
The left upper lobe and right lung are well-aerated.
hest • 39cases, whereas intralobar sequestrations arenot.
Differences in venous drainage patternsbetween intra- and extralobar sequestrationshave been emphasized as a differentiating factor but are actually variable with both types.
Thedifferentiation between intra- and extralobarsequestration cannot be made at imagingand does not affect surgical management.
isualization of the supplying systemic arteryis the characteristic finding and is the documentation the surgeons are looking for prior tosurgically removing the lesion.
ronchogenic CystBronchogenic cysts occur secondary to abnormalbudding of the tracheobronchial tree duringdevelopment and occur in the lungparenchyma or the middle mediastinum.
ediastinal lesions are reportedly morecommon, making up between 65% and 90%of cases of bronchogenic cysts.
When bronchogenic cysts occur in the lungs, they are most commonly central in location, often in a perihilardistribution.
Bronchogenic cysts are almostalways solitary lesions; multiple bronchogeniccysts are very uncommon.
Because of the propensity for middle mediastinal and perihilarlocations, compression of the distal tracheaor bronchi is not an uncommon presentation.
ir trapping in the lung distal to the lesion canoccur.
Like sequestrations, they do not contain airuntil they become infected and therefore mayappear as well-defined soft tissue attenuation orcystic air-fluid-containing masses (see Fig.
2-11).
FIGURE 3-19.
Sequestration.
A, Chest radiograph obtainedfor repeated infections shows right lower lobe asymmetricopacity.
B, CT shows feeding systemic arterial supply(arrows) arising from aorta and extending to lesion inright lower lobe.
C, CT at lung windows shows rightlower lobe air-filled cystic lesion.
The air-filled cysts raisethe possibility of a mixed CCAM/sequestration lesion.
gain noted is the systemic arterial supply (arrow).
0 • Pediatric Imaging: The FundamentalsThey can be quite large.
They appear aswell-defined cystic structures on imaging (seeFig.
2-11).
Respiratory tract infection is the most commoncause of illness in children and continues to bea significant cause of morbidity and mortality.
valuation of suspected community-acquiredpneumonia is one of the most common indications for imaging in children.
Because of thefrequency with which this scenario arises, knowledge of the issues concerning the imaging of children with community-acquired pneumonia isimportant.
The roles of imaging in these childrenare multiple: confirmation or exclusion of pneumonia, characterization and prediction of infectious agents, exclusion of other cause ofsymptoms, evaluation when there is failure toresolve, and evaluation of related complications.
onfirmation or Exclusionof PneumoniaMaking the diagnosis of pneumonia and consequently deciding on treatment and dispositionis a common but complex and difficult issue.
he symptoms and physical findings in childrenwith pneumonia are sometimes nonspecific,especially in infants and young children.
Manychildren present with nonrespiratory symptoms,such as fever, malaise, irritability, headaches,chest pain, abdominal pain, vomiting, ordecreased appetite.
Findings on physical examination are also less reliable in children than inadults because young children are less cooperative with exams and have smaller anatomy andsmaller respiratory cycles.
Because of the inaccuracy of physical examination, radiographyis often requested to evaluate children with suspected pneumonia.
Several studies have shownthat in a large percentage of cases, findings onchest radiography change caregivers’ diagnosesand treatment plans (antibiotics, bronchodilators, and patient disposition) for children beingevaluated for potential pneumonia.
At our institution, we obtain both a frontal and a lateral filmin the evaluation of a child with suspected pneumonia.
It has been shown that obtaining bothviews increases the negative predictive valueof chest radiography for pneumonia.
In addition,some findings such as hyperinflation in an infantare much more easily evaluated on the lateralthan on the frontal views (Fig.
3-20A, B).
haracterization and Predictionof Infectious AgentThe historic emphasis in textbooks and articlesconcerning pneumonia has been on radiographic patterns that suggest a specific infectiousFIGURE 3-20.
Viral lower respiratory infection in a young child.
, Frontal view shows increased perihilar markings and bandlikedensity (arrow) in right middle lobe, representing subsegmentalatelectasis.
B, Lateral view better shows marked hyperinflationwith flattened hemidiaphragms, increased anterior-to-posteriordiameter of the chest (chest is wider than it is tall), and barrelshape of chest.
Increased perihilar markings make hila appearprominent.
hest • 41agent, such as staphylococcal or streptococcalpneumonia.
However, because of the limitedways in which the lung can respond to inflammation, findings suggestive of a specific diagnosis are usually not encountered in theradiograph of a child with suspected community-acquired pneumonia.
The more general issuein the evaluation of suspected pneumonia iswhether the infectious agent is likely to bebacteria or viral, which determines whetherthe patient should be placed on antibiotics.
o answer this question it is helpful to reviewthe epidemiology of lower respiratory infectionsin children, the classic radiographic patternsof viral and bacterial pneumonia in children,and what is known about the accuracy of chestradiography in differentiating viral from bacterialinfection.
he common causal agents of lower respiratory tract infections in children vary greatlywith age.
In all age groups, viral infectionsare much more common than bacterial infections.
In infants and preschool-age children(4 months to 5 years of age), viruses cause95% of all lower respiratory tract infections.
he epidemiology is much different in schoolage children (6 to 16 years of age).
In school-agechildren, although viral agents remain the mostcommon cause of lower respiratory tract infections, the incidence of bacterial infection byStreptococcus pneumoniae increases.
What ismost striking is that Mycoplasma pneumoniae,which is an uncommon cause of pneumonia inpreschool infants and children, is the cause ofapproximately 30% of lower respiratory tractinfections in school-age children.
Therefore,the odds that a child should be administeredantibiotics for a respiratory tract infection aregreatly influenced by the child’s age.
In addition,there has been a recent increase in the incidenceof pneumonia secondary to multidrug-resistantStaphylococcus aureus infections.
These canoccur at any age.
iral infections affect the airways, causinginflammation of the small airways and peribronchial edema.
This peribronchial edema appearson radiography as increased peribronchial opacities—symmetric course markings that radiatefrom the hila into the lung (Fig.
3-21A, B; andsee Fig.
3-20A, B).
The central portions of thelungs appear to be ‘‘dirty’’ or ‘‘busy.
’ It is oneof the most subjective findings in radiology.
n addition, the combination of the bronchialwall edema, narrowed airway lumen, andnecrotic debris and mucus in the airway leadsto small airway occlusion.
This results in bothhyperinflation and areas of subsegmental atelectasis.
Hyperinflation is evident on chestradiographs in children in the presence ofhyperlucency, the depression of the hemidiaphragm to more than 10 posterior ribs, and theincreased anterior-to-posterior chest diameter.
yperinflation is often much better appreciatedon lateral than on frontal radiographs in infantsand small children (see Fig.
3-20).
Subsegmentalatelectasis appears as wedge-shaped areas ofdensity, most commonly in the lower and midFIGURE.
3-21.
Viral lower respiratory illness in a young child.
, Chest radiograph at peak of illness shows ropy increasedperihilar markings and areas of subsegmental atelectasis.
, Radiograph 5 days earlier in same child shows clear lungswith absence of increased perihilar markings.
Note the differencebetween the two radiographs.
2 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalslung (see Fig.
3-20A, B).
There are several anatomic differences that render small childrenmore predisposed to air trapping and collapsesecondary to viral infection than adults: smallairway luminal diameter, poorly developed collateral pathways of ventilation, and more abundant mucus production.
The misinterpretationof areas of atelectasis as focal opacities suspicious for bacterial pneumonia is thought to beone of the more common misinterpretationsin pediatric radiology.
n contrast to the airway involvement inviral pneumonia, bacterial pneumonia occurssecondary to inhalation of the infectious agentinto the air spaces.
There is a resultant progressive development of inflammatory exudateand edema within the acini, resulting in consolidation of the air spaces.
On chest radiography,localized air space consolidation (Fig.
3-22)occurs with air bronchograms.
The typical distribution is either lobar or segmental, dependingon when in the course of development ofthe pneumonia the radiograph is obtained.
ssociated pleural effusions are not uncommon.
lso, there is a propensity for pneumonia toappear ‘‘round’’ in younger children (Fig.
3-23).
ound pneumonia is more common in childrenyounger than 8 years of age and is most oftencaused by S.
pneumoniae.
The occurrenceof this pattern is thought to be related topoor development of pathways of collateralventilation.
Round pneumonia tends to be solitary and occurs more commonly posteriorly andin the lower lobes.
When such a lung mass isseen in a child with cough and fever, roundpneumonia should be suspected.
The childshould be treated with antibiotics and the chestradiograph repeated.
It is best to avoid unnecessary CT examination in this clinical scenario.
hen a round opacity is seen in a child olderthan 8 years of age, other pathology should besuspected.
o these classic patterns of viral andbacterial infections accurately differentiatebetween children who have bacterial infectionand need antibiotics and those who do not?Studies have shown that these radiographicpatterns do have a high negative predictivevalue (92%) for excluding bacterial pneumonia.
But the positive predictive value is low(30%).
In other words, 70% of children whohave radiographic findings of bacterial infection actually have viral infection.
In regardto decisions about administering antibiotics tochildren with suspected pneumonia, the goalsare to treat all children who have bacterialpneumonia with antibiotics while minimizingthe treatment of children with viral illnesses.
herefore, the high negative predictive valueof chest radiography for bacterial pneumoniais useful in identifying those children who donot need antibiotics.
FIGURE 3-22.
Bacterial pneumonia.
Radiograph shows focal lungconsolidation (P) in lateral aspect of right lower lobe, consistentwith bacterial pneumonia.
IGURE 3-23.
Round pneumonia.
Radiograph shows roundedopacity overlying the left hilum.
This is the location of thesuperior segment of the left lower lobe.
hest • 43Exclusion of Other PathologicProcessesMany of the presenting symptoms of pneumoniain children are nonspecific, and the spectrumof presentations overlaps with a number ofother pathologic processes involving the chestor other anatomic regions.
Therefore, one ofthe other roles of chest radiography in the evaluation of a child who potentially has pneumoniais the exclusion of other processes.
Two areasthat are often blind spots for radiologists andmay be involved by conditions that mimic pneumonia are the airway and the chest wall.
rocesses that cause extrinsic compression ofthe trachea and bronchi can mimic pneumoniaby causing noisy breathing, lobar collapse, andrecurrent infection.
Evaluation of the diameterof the airway should be stressed as a routinepart of evaluating radiographs.
Rib abnormalitiesmay be evidence that a lung opacity seen onchest radiography does not represent pneumonia.
The presence of rib erosion or asymmetricintercostal spaces helps to differentiate neuroblastoma from chest opacity secondary topneumonia.
ailure to ResolveUnlike in adults, in whom postobstructive pneumonia secondary to bronchogenic carcinoma isa concern, follow-up radiography to ensure resolution of radiographic findings is not routinelynecessary in an otherwise healthy child.
There isa tendency to obtain follow-up radiographs bothtoo early and too often.
Follow-up radiographsshould be reserved for children who havepersistent or recurrent symptoms and thosewho have an underlying condition such asimmunodeficiency.
The radiographic findingsof pneumonia can persist for 2 to 4 weeks,even when the patient is recovering appropriately clinically.
When follow-up radiographsare indicated, it is ideal to avoid obtainingthem until at least 2 to 3 weeks have passed, ifclinical symptoms allow.
auses of failure of suspected pneumonia toresolve include infected developmental lesions,bronchial obstruction, gastroesophageal refluxand aspiration, and underlying systemic disorders.
The most common developmental lungmasses that may become infected and presentas recurrent or persistent pulmonary infectioninclude sequestration and cystic adenomatoidmalformation.
These entities have been discussed previously.
omplications of PneumoniaThe evaluation of complications related to pneumonia can be divided into several clinical scenarios: primary evaluation of parapneumoniceffusions, evaluation of a child who has persistent or progressive symptoms despite medicalor surgical therapy, and the chronic sequelaeof pneumonia.
Parapneumonic effusions occur commonly inpatients who have bacterial pneumonia.
Multipletherapeutic options are available in the management of parapneumonic effusions, includingantibiotic therapy alone, repeated thoracentesis,chest tube placement, thrombolytic therapy,and thoracoscopy with surgical débridement.
reat differences in opinion exist among caregivers regarding the timing and aggressivenessof management of parapneumonic effusions.
raditionally, the aggressiveness of therapy hasbeen based on categorizing parapneumonic effusions as empyema or transudative effusion asdetermined by needle aspiration and analysis ofthe pleural fluid.
everal imaging modalities have been advocated to differentiate empyema from transudative effusion without the use of an invasivediagnostic thoracentesis, including decubitusradiographs, ultrasound, and CT.
If there is asignificant change in the position and appearance of the pleural fluid on the decubitusimages as compared to the upright radiograph,the fluid is considered to be free flowing andnonloculated.
If there is no change in positionof the pleural fluid, the fluid is considered to beloculated (Fig.
3-24A-C).
In my experience,these decubitus radiographs have been moreconfusing than helpful, and we do not advocatethe use of decubitus radiographs to evaluatepleural effusions at our institution.
On CT, findings such as thickening or enhancement of theparietal pleura and thickening or increasedattenuation of the extrapleural fat were previously thought to favor empyema over transudative effusion, but this has been shown to beinaccurate (Fig.
3-25A, B; and see Fig.
3-29).
ltrasound has also been advocated as an aid44 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalsin making therapeutic decisions for parapneumonic effusions.
In one study, parapneumoniceffusions were categorized as low grade (anechoic fluid without internal heterogeneous echogenic structures) or high grade (fibrinopurulentorganization demonstrated by the presenceof fronds, septations, or loculations) (see Figs.
-24, 3-25).
In children in whom effusionswere high grade, hospital stay was reducedby nearly 50% when operative interventionwas performed.
The length of hospital stay inchildren with low-grade effusions was notaffected by operative intervention.
Therefore,ultrasound may play a more useful role thanCT in the early evaluation of parapneumoniceffusions.
It is not uncommon for ultrasoundto show multiple septations and in the samecase to show no evidence of septations on CT(see Fig.
3-25).
We currently advocate ultrasound, rather than CT or decubitus radiographs,in the primary evaluation of parapneumoniceffusions.
When children exhibit persistent or progressivesymptoms (fever, respiratory distress, sepsis)despite appropriate medical management ofpneumonia, there is commonly an underlyingsuppurative complication.
Potential suppurativecomplications include parapneumonic effusionssuch as empyema, inadequately drained effusions, and persistent effusion due to malpositioned chest tube; parenchymal complications,FIGURE 3-24.
Parapneumonic effusion (empyema) evaluated by decubitus radiographs and ultrasound.
A,Radiograph shows pleural effusion (arrows) in child withpneumonia.
B, Decubitus radiograph with left side downshows no change in pleural effusion (arrows), I think.
Lackof change is supposed to suggest loculation, but is probablynot that helpful a diagnostic tool.
C, Ultrasound of leftpleural fluid demonstrating multiple areas of septations(arrows) and debris—a high-grade effusion, predictive ofbenefit from aggressive drainage.
hest • 45such as cavitary necrosis or lung abscess; andpurulent pericarditis.
Although chest radiography is the primary imaging modality for detecting such complications, a significant percentageof them are not demonstrated by radiography.
n a child who has had a noncontributory radiograph and who has not responded appropriatelyto therapy, contrast-enhanced CT has beenshown to be useful in detecting clinically significant suppurative complications.
CT can helpto differentiate whether there is a pleural or aparenchymal reason for persistent illness.
dministration of intravenous contrast is vitalto maximize the likelihood of detection andthe characterization of both parenchymal andpleural complications.
On contrast-enhanced CT, both noncompromised consolidated lung parenchyma andatelectasis enhance diffusely.
Large areas ofdecreased or absent enhancement are indicativeof underlying parenchymal ischemia or impending infarction.
Suppurative lung parenchymalcomplications include a spectrum of abnormalities, such as cavitary necrosis, lung abscess,pneumatocele, bronchopleural fistula, and pulmonary gangrene.
The name given to the suppurative process is determined by severalfactors, including the severity, distribution, condition of the adjacent lung parenchyma, andtemporal relationship with disease resolution.
ung abscess represents a dominant focusof suppuration surrounded by a well-formedfibrous wall.
Lung abscess is actually uncommonin otherwise healthy children and typicallyoccurs in children who are immunocompromised.
On contrast-enhanced CT, lung abscessesappear as fluid- or air-filled cavities with definable enhancing walls (Fig.
3-26).
Typically, thereis no evidence of necrosis in the surroundinglung.
Pneumatocele is a term given to thinwalled cysts seen at imaging and may representFIGURE 3-25.
Parapneumonic effusion (empyema) evaluated byCT and ultrasound.
A, CT shows left parapneumonic effusion.
here are no findings to suggest empyema on CT.
There are noseptations seen by CT, which is typical.
B, Ultrasound showsconsolidated lung (L) with surrounding band of pleural fluid(arrows).
Note multiple echogenic septations consistent withcomplex effusion.
IGURE 3-26.
Lung abscess.
Contrast-enhanced CT shows welldefined cavity (arrows) with enhancing wall and containing airfluid level.
6 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalsa later or less severe stage of resolving or healingnecrosis (Fig.
3-27A-C).
avitary necrosis is the most commonlyencountered suppurative complication.
It ischaracterized by a dominant area of necrosisof a consolidated lobe that is associated with avariable number of thin-walled cysts (Fig.
3-28).
T findings of cavitary necrosis include lossof normal lung architecture, decreased parenchymal enhancement, loss of the lung-pleuralmargin, and multiple thin-walled cavities containing air or fluid and lacking an enhancingborder (Fig.
3-29).
Although historicallydescribed as a complication of staphylococcalpneumonia, cavitary necrosis was much morecommonly seen as a complication of streptococcal pneumonia during the last decade.
Cavitarynecrosis in association with multi-drug-resistantS.
aureus infection has been occurring withincreased frequency recently (see Fig.
3-27).
he presence of cavitary necrosis is indicativeof an intense and prolonged illness.
However,unlike in adults in whom the mortality rate incavitary necrosis is high, and early surgicalremoval of the affected lung has been advocated, the long-term outcome for children withcavitary necrosis is favorable in most cases withmedical management alone.
It is amazing that inchildren with cavitary necrosis, follow-up radiographs obtained more than 40 days after theacute illness are most often normal or showonly minimal scarring.
t may sometimes be difficult on a singleimaging study to differentiate a suppurativelung parenchymal complication of pneumoniafrom an underlying cystic congenital lungFIGURE 3-27.
Rapid development of necrosis and pneumatocele formation in an infant with multi-drug-resistantS.
aureus pneumonia.
A, Radiograph obtained in the intensive care unit after intubation for respiratory failure showspatchy bilateral lung consolidation.
Note position of PICCwith tip in inferior aspect of superior vena cava (arrow).
ote widening of soft tissues, consistent with anasarca.
B,Radiograph 3 days later shows interval development of multiple bilateral areas of necrosis and cyst formation.
There isprogressive anasarca.
C.
Radiograph taken 2 days after thatshown in B shows progressive development of necrosis andcyst formation.
Not that it matters, but because many of thecysts are thin-walled and without surrounding opacification,pneumatocele is acceptable terminology.
Note the development of bilateral pneumothorax with left chest tube placement and progressive anasarca.
hest • 47lesion that has become secondarily infected.
nfected congenital cystic adenomatoid malformations may appear very similar to cavitarynecrosis.
Obviously, historical imaging studiesshowing a lack of a cystic lesion excludeunderlying CCAM, but such historical examinations often do not exist or are not available.
bservable resolution of the cystic lesion onfollow-up studies ensures that the lesion is nolonger clinically relevant and makes cavitarynecrosis much more likely.
However, someCCAMs have been reported to scar down andresolve after becoming infected.
Acute pneumonia can lead to parenchymaldamage and long-term sequelae.
The mostcommon sequelae of acute pneumonia arebronchiectasis and Swyer-James syndrome.
ronchiectasis is enlargement of the diameterof the bronchi that is related to damage to thebronchial walls.
It is best demonstrated by highresolution CT, where the diagnostic findingis that the bronchus in question is larger indiameter than the adjacent pulmonary artery(Fig.
3-30).
Swyer-James syndrome is characterized by unilateral lung hyperlucency that isthought to be secondary to a virus-induced necrotizing bronchiolitis that leads to an obliterativebronchiolitis (see Fig.
3-30).
Radiography showsa hyperlucent and enlarged lung with a staticlung volume.
The pulmonary vessels are lessprominent than on the normal side.
uberculosisThe incidence of tuberculosis in children hasbeen increasing.
Children with primary tuberculosis can present with pulmonary consolidationwithin any lobe.
It is often associated withFIGURE 3-28.
Cavitary necrosis.
Photograph of surgical specimenshows consolidated lung (tan area) with areas of necrosis andcavity formation (arrows).
FIGURE 3-29.
Cavitary necrosis with bronchopulmonary fistulaformation.
CT shows consolidation of the right lung.
Portions ofthe lung demonstrate cavitary necrosis (arrows).
There are alsoareas of consolidated lung that enhance (L) and are not compromised.
There is a pleural effusion (P) that contains both air andfluid.
There is thickening and enhancement of the parietalpleura (white arrowhead) and thickening of the extrapleuralspace (black arrowhead), both findings that claimed to be suggestive of empyema rather than transudative effusion but wereshown to be inaccurate.
IGURE 3-30.
Chronic complications related to recurrent pneumonias.
CT shows multiple round, soft tissue density lesions inmedial right lower lobe (arrows) consistent with bronchiectasiswith mucus plugging.
In the left lower lobe, there is an area ofair trapping (arrowheads) consistent with obliterative bronchiolitis.
This area remained hyperlucent on expiratory images.
8 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalshilar lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion.
herefore, when lung consolidation is seenwith associated lymphadenopathy or effusionin a child who is not acutely ill, there shouldbe a high suspicion for tuberculosis.
Most ofthe cases of pulmonary tuberculosis that I haveseen have demonstrated unilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (Fig.
3-31A, B).
Such casesshould be considered tuberculosis until provenotherwise.
In children with certain underlying conditions,the clinical scenarios and differential diagnosesdiffer greatly from those seen in the generalpopulation.
Commonly encountered scenariosinclude the evaluation of pneumonia in immunocompromised children, acute chest syndromein children with sickle cell anemia, and pulmonary complications in children with cysticfibrosis.
neumonia in ImmunodeficientChildrenChildren can be immunocompromised for avariety of reasons, including cancer therapy,bone marrow transplantation, solid organ transplantation, primary immunodeficiency, andAIDS.
This is a population that continues toincrease.
Acute pulmonary processes are acommon cause of morbidity and mortality inthese patients.
As with immunocompetent children, radiography is the primary modality usedto confirm or exclude pneumonia.
However,because many of the chest radiographs obtainedin these children are portable and because of theconsequences of missing an infection, CT playsa greater role in evaluating for an acute pulmonary process when chest radiographs are noncontributory.
I would guess that in many tertiaryinstitutions the number of chest CTs obtainedin immunocompromised children is greaterthan the number of those obtained in immunocompetent children.
n immunocompetent children, the mainquestion is whether a pulmonary processis viral or bacterial; in immunocompromisedchildren, there are many more possible causesof acute pulmonary processes They includealveolar hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, drugreaction, idiopathic pneumonia, lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis, bronchiolitis obliterans,bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia, and chronic graft-versus-host disease.
he CT findings for many of these entities areoverlapping and nonspecific.
A clinical questionoften posed is this: Is there evidence of fungalinfection? The hallmark CT finding indicatingfungal infection is the presence of nodulesFIGURE 3-31.
Tuberculosis in a 7-year-old boy.
A and B, Frontaland lateral radiographs of the chest demonstrate a left hilar mass(arrows) consistent with unilateral lymphadenopathy.
There isalso left upper lobe collapse.
Note displaced major fissure onlateral view (arrowheads).
hest • 49(Figs.
3-32A, B, 3-33).
They are commonly clustered and may exhibit poorly defined margins,cavitation, or a surrounding halo that has theopacity of ground glass.
However, many ofthese findings are also nonspecific.
In thesecases CT does aid in directing potential interventions, such as bronchoscopy or percutaneouslung biopsy, to high yield areas.
cute Chest Syndrome in SickleCell AnemiaChildren with sickle cell anemia can developacute chest syndrome, which is manifestedby fever, chest pain, hypoxia, and pulmonaryopacities on chest radiographs (Fig.
3-34).
cute chest syndrome is much more commonin children than adults with sickle cell anemia.
t occurs most commonly between 2 and 4years of age and is the leading cause of death(25% of deaths) and the second most commoncause of hospitalization in those affected withsickle cell anemia.
Although it is debatedwhether the cause of such episodes is moreoften related to infection or infarction, manybelieve the lung opacities are related to ribinfarction, splinting, and subsequent areasFIGURE 3-32.
Fungal pneumonia in child after bone marrowtransplantation for aplastic anemia.
A, CT shows poorly definednodules and associated ground-glass opacity.
B, A CT takenearlier shows clear lungs.
Note the striking change since thisbaseline study.
IGURE 3-33.
Histoplasmosis infection.
CT shows multiplenodules bilaterally.
There is a biopsy site on the left, anteriorly.
FIGURE 3-34.
Acute chest syndrome in a 6-year-old boy withsickle cell anemia.
A, Chest radiograph obtained at admissionshows low lung volumes and minimal focal opacity within theleft lower lobe.
B, Chest radiograph obtained 1 day later showsconsolidation of a large portion of the left lung.
C, Chest radiograph obtained 2 days after A shows complete left lungopacification.
0 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalsof atelectasis.
Radiography often shows segmental to lobar pulmonary opacities but can also benormal.
There can be an associated increasein cardiomegaly.
Bone scans may show ribinfarcts.
The children are treated with oxygen,antibiotics, and pain control, and the pulmonaryopacities are commonly monitored byradiography.
ystic FibrosisCystic fibrosis is a genetic disease that most commonly affects the respiratory and gastrointestinaltracts.
In the respiratory system, abnormally viscous mucus leads to airway obstruction andinfection that causes bronchitis and bronchiectasis.
Children may initially present with recurrentrespiratory tract infections.
Radiography may benormal at young ages but eventually demonstrates hyperinflation, increased peribronchialmarkings, mucus plugging, and bronchiectasis.
he hilar areas can become prominent becauseof a combination of lymphadenopathy secondary to the chronic inflammation and enlargedcentral pulmonary arteries related to the development of pulmonary arterial hypertension.
hest radiography is used to monitor the diseaseand evaluate for complications during acuteexacerbations.
Such complications includefocal pneumonia, pneumothorax, and pulmonary hemorrhage.
To monitor the progressionof disease, some institutions use high-resolutionCT, which demonstrates findings such as bronchiectasis and bronchial wall thickening ingreater detail and earlier than does radiography(Fig.
3-35).
IGH-RESOLUTION CT INOne of the more common indications for highresolution CT in the pediatric population is questioned chronic aspiration.
Often this issue arisesin children with neurologic abnormalities suchas cerebral palsy or chronic tracheotomy tubeswhen decisions about methods of feeding arebeing entertained.
High-resolution CT findingsof chronic aspiration include bronchiectasis,tree-in-bud opacities (Fig.
3-36A, B), andincreased interstitial linear opacities.
Findingsmore often occur in lower lobes.
raumaThere is a greater component of cartilage thanbone within the chest walls of children, so thereis more compliance than there is in the chestwalls of adults.
Because of this increased compliance, the sequelae of trauma to the pediatricchest are unique in several ways.
First, the incidence of rib fractures after high-speed motorvehicle accidents is lower in children than inadults.
Second, the deceleration forces of highspeed collisions are more likely to be dispersedinto the lung in children, resulting in lung contusion.
Children with lung contusions have beenFIGURE 3-35.
Cystic fibrosis.
A, Radiograph shows areas of bronchial wall thickening and bronchiectasis, most prominent in theright upper lobe.
B, High-resolution CT shows diffuse bronchiectasis and bronchial wall thickening within the upper lobes.
here are also multiple areas of poorly defined opacities, particularly in the peripheral portions of the left upper lobe.
Thesehave a tree-in-bud appearance.
hest • 51shown to have higher morbidity and mortalityrates than those without lung contusions.
lthough chest CT is not commonly performedto evaluate for lung contusion, the lower lungsare often seen on CT when it is performed toevaluate for abdominal trauma.
Characteristicfindings in lung contusion on CT include nonsegmental distribution, posterior location, crescent shape, and mixed confluent and nodularcharacteristics (Fig.
3-37).
In children withsmall lung contusions, the compliance of thechest wall can result in a rim of nonopacifiedlung between the consolidated contusion andthe adjacent ribs seen on CT (see Fig.
3-37).
his subpleural sparing can be helpful in differentiating lung contusion from other causes oflung opacification.
The CT finding that classifiesan opacified area as a lung laceration ratherthan a lung contusion is the presence of afluid- or air-filled cyst within the opacified lung(Fig.
3-38A, B; and see Fig.
3-37).
These cysticspaces result from torn lung.
inally, the sites of rib fracture in childrendiffer from those in adults.
Rib fractures in youngchildren in the absence of an obvious traumaticevent are highly suspicious for child abuse (Figs.
-39, 3-40A, B).
Pediatric rib fractures are morelikely to be posterior than lateral.
In child abuse,as a result of squeezing an infant’s thorax, theposterior ribs can be excessively levered atthe costotransverse process articulation, causingposterior fracture at this site.
In the appropriatelyaged child, these findings are consideredpathognomonic for child abuse.
The incidence of aortic injury is also muchlower in children than in adults.
This, in combination with the lower incidence of obesityin children as compared to adults, makes theuncleared mediastinum on a chest radiographafter trauma a much less common scenarioin children than in adults.
Otherwise, the useof CT and angiography and the imaging findingsof aortic injuries are no different from thoseencountered in adults.
The aspiration of the hydrocarbons in gasoline,furniture polish, kerosene, or lighter fluid whenyoung children get into and drink such liquidscan cause a combination of chemicalFIGURE 3-36.
Aspiration.
A, Radiograph in a child suspectedof having aspiration shows increased nodular opacities in theright lung.
B, High-resolution CT shows multiple nodular opacities (arrows) with tree-in-bud appearance.
FIGURE 3-37.
Lung contusion and laceration after a motor vehicle accident.
CT shows characteristic findings of contusionon the left, including posterior location, crescent shape, nonsegmental distribution, and subpleural sparing (arrows).
On theright, there is large pneumothorax (PTX) and consolidationof lung with an air-filled cyst (arrow) consistent with lunglaceration.
2 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalspneumonitis and atelectasis secondary to surfactant destruction.
Radiographic findings may notmanifest for up to 12 hours after ingestion.
owever, a normal radiograph at 24 hoursafter suspected ingestion excludes significantaspiration.
The lung opacities tend to be in thelung bases (Fig.
3-41) and may persist for weeksafter clinical improvement.
Pneumatoceles arenot uncommon sequelae.
ediastinal MassesThe mediastinum is the most common locationof primary thoracic masses in children.
Also, themajority of mediastinal masses occur in childrenrather than in adults.
As in adults, characterizingthe location of the mass as anterior, middle, orposterior mediastinal can focus the differentialdiagnosis of mediastinal masses (Table 3-4).
By far the most commonly encountered issues inthe anterior mediastinum are the normal thymusmistaken as a mass and lymphoma.
There are alarge number of other potential but much lesscommon causes of anterior mediastinal massesin children.
They include teratoma (and othergerm cell tumors), thymoma, multilocularthymic cysts seen in association with AIDS,and thyroid enlargement and heterogeneity(often with calcifications) in Langerhan cell histiocytosis (in which lung cysts are also present;Fig.
3-42).
FIGURE 3-38.
Lung laceration following motor vehicle accident.
, Radiograph shows nonspecific opacification of right lowerlobe.
B, CT shows right lower lobe consolidation with airand fluid-filled cavities (arrows) consistent with lung laceration.
IGURE 3-39.
Child abuse.
Radiograph shows healing fractures(arrows) of right fourth and fifth ribs.
ABLE 3-4.
Common Mediastinal Masses byLocationAnterior Middle PosteriorNormal thymusLymphomaTeratomaLymphadenopathyDuplication cystNeuroblastomaChest • 53One of the most common areas of confusion inthe imaging of children is related to differentiating the normal thymus from pathologicprocesses.
This confusion led to thymic radiation therapy in the first half of the 20th century,when children with a normal prominent thymuson chest radiography were radiated because ofthe erroneous belief that a big thymus compressed the airway and predisposed to death.
istinguishing the normal thymus from diseasecontinues to cause diagnostic problems today,particularly for those who do not often imagechildren.
n children, the thymus has a variableappearance in both size and shape.
In childrenless than 5 years of age, and particularly ininfants, the thymus can appear to be very large(Fig.
3-43).
Large thymuses are said to be morecommon in boys.
The thymus also has variableconfigurations.
A number of names havebecome associated with normal variations inthe thymus, such as the sail sign (Fig.
3-44),which refers to a triangular extension of thethymus, most commonly to the right, on frontalchest radiography.
It resembles a sail.
Thisshould not be confused with the spinnaker sailFIGURE 3-40.
Child abuse.
A, Radiograph shows multiplefractures that occurred at different times.
There are multiplesubacute healing rib fractures (white arrows) with callus formation, a subacute healing right clavicle fracture (arrowhead), andmultiple acute right-sided rib fractures (black arrows) withoutcallus formation.
B, CT shows callus around healing rib fractures on left (arrows) and characteristic acute fracture of the posterior rib (arrowhead) on right.
A rib fractures against thetransverse process when a child is squeezed.
IGURE 3-41.
Hydrocarbon aspiration in a 1-year-old boy whodrank gasoline from an orange juice container on the family’sgarage floor.
Chest radiograph shows bibasilar lung consolidation.
The patient is intubated.
IGURE 3-42.
Enlarged thymus with calcifications in child withLangerhans cell histiocytosis.
CT shows prominent thymus withhigh-attenuation calcifications.
4 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalssign (Fig.
3-45), which is an indication of pneumomediastinum, in which the abnormallylocated air lifts the thymus up so it looks likethe sail on the front of a racing boat.
Between5 and 10 years of age, the thymus becomesless prominent radiographically because ofthe disproportionately decreased growth of thethymus in relationship to the growth of the restof the body.
During a child’s second decade,the thymus should not be visualized as a discreteanterior mediastinal mass on chest radiography.
bnormality of the thymus (or anterior mediastinum) is suspected when the thymic silhouette has an abnormal shape or an abnormal sizein relationship to the patient’s age.
Displacementor compression of the airway or other structuresis suspicious for abnormality.
CT, ultrasound,MR imaging, and fluoroscopy can be usedto help differentiate the normal thymus froman abnormal mass, but CT is probably usedmost commonly.
When CT is performed to evaluate suspicious cases, the normal thymusshould appear homogeneous in attenuation,typically is quadrilateral in shape in youngchildren (Fig.
3-46) and triangular in teenagers(Fig.
3-47A, B), and may have slightly convexmargins.
Heterogeneity, calcification, and displacement or compression of the airway orvascular structures indicate an abnormality(Fig 3-48A-D; and see Fig.
3-42).
True pathologicmasses of the thymus are actually quite rarein children.
hymic rebound is another source of confusion concerning normal thymic tissue.
After apatient has ceased receiving chemotherapy fora malignancy, it is normal for the thymus to growback, as seen in serial CT examinations.
Thymicvolume has been shown to vary cyclically by asmuch as 40% during rounds of chemotherapy(see Fig.
3-47).
This intervallic increase in softtissue attenuation in the anterior mediastinumFIGURE 3-43.
Normal, prominent size of the thymus.
hotograph from autopsy of an infant who died of suddeninfant death syndrome shows frontal view of thymus (T) afterthoracotomy.
Note the prominent size of the thymus in relationto the heart (H).
The thymus is bilobed.
In this patient the leftlobe is larger than the right.
(Image courtesy Janet L.
Strife,MD, Cincinnati, OH.
FIGURE 3-44.
Normal, prominent thymus with ‘‘sail’’ sign.
adiograph shows prominent but normal thymus with rightward triangular extension (arrow).
IGURE 3-45.
‘‘Spinnaker sail sign’’ in child with pneumomediastinum.
Radiograph shows thymus (arrows) lifted off of mediastinum by air in mediastinum.
The uplifted thymus resemblesa spinnaker sail.
hest • 55should not be considered abnormal whenencountered on cross-sectional imaging.
Lymphoma is the third most common tumorin children, exceeded only by leukemia andbrain tumors.
It is by far the most commonabnormal anterior mediastinal mass in children,particularly in older children and teenagers.
herefore, lymphoma is the working diagnosisfor newly diagnosed anterior mediastinal massesin children.
Age is helpful in differentiatinga normal thymus from lymphoma becausea normal thymus is most common in small children and lymphoma is most common in teenagers.
The most problematic case is the slightlyprominent anterior mediastinum in a 10year-old.
One helpful clue in identifying lymphoma is that mediastinal lymphoma is commonlyassociated with cervical lymphadenopathy.
he most common types of lymphomathat involve the mediastinum include Hodgkinlymphoma and the lymphoblastic type of nonHodgkin lymphoma.
Both lesions can appearas discrete lymph nodes or as a conglomeratemass of lymph nodes, most commonly withinthe anterior mediastinum (see Fig.
3-48).
ung involvement, when present, is usuallycontiguous with mediastinal and hilar disease.
alcifications are rare in untreated lymphomaand when present should raise thepossibility of other diagnoses such as teratoma(Fig.
3-50).
ost mediastinal masses are initially identified on chest radiography and then further evaluated by CT, which confirms the presence of ananterior mediastinal mass, evaluates the extentof disease, and evaluates for potential complications.
The potential complications related tomediastinal lymphoma include airway compression, compressive obstruction of venous structures (superior vena cava, pulmonary veins),and pericardial effusion (see Figs.
3-48, 3-49).
FIGURE 3-47.
Thymic rebound in a child on chemotherapy.
, CT taken while the child was on chemotherapy shows littlethymic tissue.
B, CT taken 3 months later when child wasoff chemotherapy shows regrowth of thymus (arrows).
Notethe typical triangular shape of the thymus as is seen duringteenage years.
FIGURE 3-46.
Normal thymus on cross-sectional imaging.
CT ina young child shows thymus (T) to be quadrilateral in shape, tohave convex margins, and to be of homogeneous attenuation.
here is no compression of the trachea or superior vena cava.
6 • Pediatric Imaging: The FundamentalsAirway compression is especially importantbecause it may influence decisions concerningsurgical biopsy with general anesthesia versuspercutaneous biopsy with local anesthesia.
If apatient cannot lie recumbent for CT imagingbecause of airway compression, the imagescan usually be obtained with the patient positioned prone because the anterior mediastinalmass falls away from the airway.
Compressionof the airway by more than 50% from theexpected round shape has been shown to beassociated with a high risk for complicationsrelated to anesthesia.
Because of this, somesuch mediastinal masses are biopsied usingultrasound guidance and local anesthesia.
iddle Mediastinal MassesMiddle mediastinal masses are less commonthan anterior or posterior mediastinal massesand are usually related to lymphadenopathy orFIGURE 3-48.
Lymphoma.
A, Frontal radiograph shows marked enlargement of superior mediastinum and associated right pleuraleffusion.
B, Lateral radiograph shows posterior displacement, compression, and poor visualization of the trachea (arrow), furthersupporting the presence of an abnormal mediastinal mass.
C, CT shows large anterior mediastinal mass (M) with compression andposterior displacement of trachea (arrow) and compression of the superior vena cava (arrowhead).
Note right pleural effusion.
, Coronal CT again shows mass (M) and compression of superior vena cava (arrow).
hest • 57duplication cysts.
Lymphadenopathy can beinflammatory, most often secondary to granulomatous disease, such as tuberculosis or fungalinfection; or to neoplastic growth secondary tometastatic disease or lymphoma.
Duplicationcysts can be bronchogenic (see Fig.
2-11), enteric,or neurenteric.
Duplication cysts are well-definedmasses that appear cystic on cross-sectionalimaging.
Neurenteric cysts, by definition, haveassociated vertebral anomalies.
Pathologic processes related to the esophagus can also causemiddle mediastinal abnormalities.
Chronic foreign bodies can erode through the esophagusand cause a middle mediastinal mass, typicallyin the cervical esophagus at the level of the thoracic inlet (Fig.
3-51A, B).
A dilatated esophagusresulting from achalasia or a hiatal hernia mayalso appear as a middle mediastinal mass onchest radiography.
FIGURE 3-49.
Lymphoma with pericardial effusion.
CT imagefrom level of heart in a child with an anterior mediastinalmass; on more superior images shows extension of lymphomamass (L) inferiorly.
Note adjacent pericardial fluid (arrowheads)and bilateral pleural fluid (arrows).
FIGURE 3-50.
Teratoma.
CT shows anterior mediastinal mass(M) that is of fat attenuation.
FIGURE 3-51.
Chronic esophageal foreign body presenting asdysphagia and stridor in a young child.
A, Axial CT showsinflammatory mass at thoracic inlet.
There is a linear metallicdensity (arrows) suspicious for an eroded, chronic foreign bodyfrom the upper esophagus.
The trachea is compressed (arrowhead).
B, Coronal CT shows dense oval structure (arrows) inan inflammatory mass.
At surgical retrieval, the foreign bodywas found to be a sequin.
8 • Pediatric Imaging: The FundamentalsFIGURE 3-52.
Neuroblastoma.
A, Radiograph shows a large mass in right upper hemithorax.
There is widening (W) of the interspacebetween the right third and fourth ribs and erosion of the undersurface of the right third rib (arrow).
The rib splaying and erosiondocument chest wall involvement and the posterior nature of the tumor.
B, CT shows large mass (M) with compression of the trachea(arrow).
The mass is so large it extends from anterior to posterior chest walls.
C, MIBG scan shows avid uptake of radiotracerwithin the mass (arrows), consistent with a neurogenic tumor.
D, Photograph taken during surgical resection shows a mass (M) arisingfrom the posterior chest.
hest • 59Posterior Mediastinal MassesThere are a number of causes of posterior mediastinal masses in children.
They include neuralcrest tumor, neurofibroma, lateral menigocele,diskitis, hematoma, and extramedullary hematopoiesis.
However, just as anterior mediastinalmasses in older children are considered to belymphoma, the working diagnosis for posteriormediastinal masses in young children is neuroblastoma until proven otherwise.
Neurogenic tumors (neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, ganglioneuroma) are the mostcommon posterior mediastinal masses in childhood.
Neuroblastoma is discussed in detail inthe genitourinary section.
Approximately 15%of neuroblastomas occur in the posterior mediastinum, most occurring before a child is 2 yearsof age.
ost neuroblastomas are visible on frontalradiographs of the chest as a posterior opacity.
he soft tissue mass is often surprisingly poorlyvisualized on the lateral view.
There is frequently erosion, destruction, or splaying of theadjacent posterior ribs (Fig.
3-52A-D).
Thesefindings may be subtle, so whenever a posteriorchest opacity is identified an effort should bemade to look for rib erosion.
The neuroforaminamay appear enlarged on the lateral view, secondary to intraspinal extension of the tumor.
alcifications are reported to be visible onchest radiography in as many as 25% of cases,although in my experience it is less than that.
ross-sectional imaging with CT or MR imagingconfirms the presence of the tumor and evaluates extent of disease, particularly whether thereis intraspinal extension.
Thoracic neuroblastomas have better prognosis than abdominalneuroblastomas.
ediatric Chest Wall MassesA number of primary malignant processes canarise in the chest walls of children.
They includeEwing sarcoma, Askin tumor (primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the chest wall), and other sarcomas (Fig.
3-53).
Most of these lesions presentwith painful enlargement of the chest wall.
etastatic involvement by neuroblastoma, lymphoma, or leukemia is actually more commonthan are primary tumors.
On imaging, all ofthese malignancies typically appear asnonspecific aggressive lesions with poorlydefined margins that include bony destructionand pleural involvement.
However, one mustconsider that as much as one third of childrenhave variations in the configuration of the anterior chest wall, including asymmetric findings,such as tilted sternum (Fig.
3-54), prominentconvexity of anterior rib or costal cartilage,prominent asymmetric costal cartilage, parachondral nodules, or mild degrees of pectusexcavatum or carinatum.
It is common forthese asymmetric variants to be palpated byFIGURE 3-53.
Undifferentiated sarcoma of the chest wall in ayoung child.
CT shows soft tissue attenuation mass (M) involving the anterolateral chest wall on right.
IGURE 3-54.
Tilted sternum with prominent costal cartilagepresenting as a palpable mass on physical exam.
CT shows thesternum (arrowhead) to be tilted with respect to the horizontalright-to-left axis of the body.
The right margin of the sternum ismore anterior than the right.
The associated anterior position ofthe right costal cartilage (arrow), a normal variant, caused thepalpable finding on physical exam.
0 • Pediatric Imaging: The Fundamentalsthe pediatrician, parent, or patient, and becauseof the fear of malignancy, cross-sectional imaging is requested.
In a previous study thatreviewed CT and MR examinations performedto evaluate children with suspected chest wallmasses, all of the palpable lesions that wereasymptomatic were related to normal anatomicvariations.
Knowledge that such variations arecommon should be communicated to referringphysicians and parents when imaging is beingcontemplated in a child with an asymptomaticchest wall ‘‘lump.
’One of the most common abnormalities inchest wall configuration is pectus excavatum.
lthough the majority of associated problemsdue to this deformity are cosmetic, pectus deformities can cause chest pain, fatigue, dyspneaon exertion, palpitations, and restrictive lung disease.
When the deformities are severe, surgicalrepair can be performed.
Pectus excavatumis commonly treated by a minimally invasiveprocedure called a Nuss procedure.
Prior tothe Nuss procedure, surgeons commonlyrequest CT examination to document theHaller index, which quantifies the severity ofthe pectus deformity (Fig.
3-55).
To calculatethe Haller index, low tube current (mA) imagesare obtained through the level of the greatestdegree of pectus deformity.
The Haller indexis equal to the transverse left-to-right diameterof the chest, divided by the anterior-to-posteriordiameter.
The greater the Haller index, themore severe the pectus.
A patient with a Hallerindex greater than 3.
 is considered a surgicalcandidate.
uggested ReadingsCondon VR: Pneumonia in children, J Thorac Imaging6:31-44, 1991.
onnelly LF: Maximizing the usefulness of imagingin children with community-acquired pneumonia, AJR172:505-512, 1999.
onnelly LF, Klosterman LA: Subpleural sparing: a CT finding of lung contusion in children, Radiology 204:385-387,1997.
onnelly LF, Frush DP: Abnormalities of the chest wall inpediatric patients, AJR 173:1595-1601, 1999.
onnelly LF, Frush DP: Localized lucent chest lesions inneonates: causes and differentiation, AJR 172:1651-1658,1999.
riscom NT: Respiratory problems of early life now allowingsurvival into adulthood: concepts for radiologists, AJR158:1-8, 1992.
riscom NT, Wohl MB, Kirkpatrick JA: Lower respiratoryinfections: how infants differ from adults, Radiol ClinNorth Am 16:367-387, 1978.
unisaki SM, Barnewolt CE, Estroff JA, et al: Large fetal congenital cystic adenomatoid malformations: growth trendsand patient survival, J Pediatr Surg 42:404-410, 2007.
erton DF: Diagnostic imaging of mediastinal masses inchildren, AJR 158:825-832, 1992.
wischuk KE, John SD: Immature lung problems:can our nomenclature be more specific? AJR 166:917-918, 1996.
ingleton EB: Radiologic consideration of intensive carein the premature infant, Radiology 140:291-300, 1981.
IGURE 3-55.
Pectus excavatum.
CT shows severe concavity ofanterior chest wall.
White lines are the anterior-to-posterior andleft-to-right diameters of the chest.
These are measured to calculate the Haller index, a quantitative measure of pectus severity.
hest • 61