The chest radiograph is one of the most commonly obtained examinations in pediatric imaging. It is also the examination most likely to be
encountered by radiology residents, pediatric
residents, general radiologists, and pediatricians.
Therefore, topics such as chest imaging in neonates and the evaluation of suspected pneumonia are discussed in detail.
Causes of respiratory distress in newborn infants
can be divided into those that are secondary to
diffuse pulmonary disease (medical causes) and
those that are secondary to a space-occupying
mass compressing the pulmonary parenchyma
(surgical causes).
Diffuse pulmonary disease causes respiratory
distress much more commonly than surgical diseases, particularly in premature infants, who
make up the majority of cases of respiratory distress in the newborn. A simple way to evaluate
these patients and try to offer a limited differential diagnosis is to evaluate the lung volumes and
to characterize the pulmonary opacities.
Lung volumes can be categorized as high,
normal, or low. Normally, the apex of the dome
of the diaphragm is expected to be at the level of
approximately the tenth posterior rib. Lung opacity, if present, can be characterized as streaky,
perihilar (central) densities that have a linear
quality or as diffuse, granular opacities that
have an almost sandlike character. Classically,
cases fall into one of the following two categories: (1) cases with high lung volumes and
streaky perihilar densities and (2) cases with
low lung volumes and granular opacities
(Table 3-1). This is more of a guideline, rather
than a rule, because many neonates with diffuse
pulmonary disease have normal lung volumes.
The differential diagnosis for cases with high
lung volumes and streaky perihilar densities
includes meconium aspiration, transient tachypnea of the newborn, and neonatal pneumonia.
Most of the neonates in this group are term. The
differential for cases with low lung volumes and
granular opacities includes surfactant deficiency
and -hemolytic streptococcal pneumonia. Most
of these neonates are premature.
Meconium aspiration syndrome results from
intrapartum or intrauterine aspiration of meconium. It usually occurs secondary to stress, such as
hypoxia, and more often occurs in term or postmature neonates. The aspirated meconium
causes both obstruction of small airways secondary to its tenacious nature and also chemical
pneumonitis. The degree of respiratory failure
can be severe. Radiographic findings include
hyperinflation (high lung volumes), which may
be asymmetric and patchy, and asymmetric
lung densities that tend to have a ropy appearance and a perihilar distribution (Fig. 3-1).
Commonly there are areas of hyperinflation
alternating with areas of atelectasis. Pleural effusions can be present. Because of the smallairway obstruction by the meconium, air-block
complications are common, with pneumothorax
occurring in 20% to 40% of cases. Meconium
aspiration syndrome is relatively common;
25,000 to 30,000 cases occur in the United
States annually.
Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) is
also referred to by a variety of other names,
including wet lung disease and transient respiratory distress. It occurs secondary to delayed
clearance of fetal lung fluid. Physiologically,
the clearing of fetal lung fluid is facilitated by
the ‘‘thoracic squeeze’’ during vaginal deliveries;
therefore, most cases of TTN are related to
cesarean section in which the thoracic squeeze
is bypassed. Other causes include maternal diabetes and maternal sedation. The hallmark of
TTN is a benign course. Respiratory distress
develops by 6 hours of age, peaks at 1 day of
age, and is resolved by 2 to 3 days. There is a
spectrum of radiographic findings similar to
those seen with mild to severe pulmonary
edema. There is a combination of airspace opacification, coarse interstitial markings, prominent
and indistinct pulmonary vasculature, fluid in
the fissures, pleural effusion, and cardiomegaly
(Fig. 3-2). Lung volumes are normal to increased.
Neonatal pneumonia can be caused by a large
number of infectious agents that can be acquired
intrauterine, during birth, or soon after birth.
With the exception of -hemolytic streptococcal
pneumonia, which will be discussed separately, the radiographic appearance of neonatal
pneumonia is that of patchy, asymmetric perihilar densities and hyperinflation (Fig. 3-3). Pleural
effusions may be present (Fig. 3-4). Such cases
of neonatal pneumonia may have a similar
radiographic appearance to and be indistinguishable from meconium aspiration syndrome
when using imaging alone.
Surfactant-deficient disease (SDD; also referred
to as respiratory distress syndrome or hyaline
membrane disease) is a common disorder, with
approximately 40,000 new cases annually in the
United States. It is primarily a disease of premature infants, affecting up to 50% of them, and it
is the most common cause of death in live newborns. SDD is related to the inability of premature type II pneumocytes to produce surfactant.
Normally, surfactant coats the alveolar surfaces
and decreases surface tension, allowing for the
alveoli to remain open. As a result of the lack of
surfactant, there is alveolar collapse, resulting in
noncompliant lungs. The radiographic findings
reflect these pathologic changes (Fig. 3-5A, B).
Lung volumes are low. There are bilateral granular opacities that represent collapsed alveoli
interspersed with open alveoli. Because the
larger bronchi do not collapse, there are prominent air bronchograms. When the process is
severe enough and the majority of alveoli are
collapsed, there may be coalescence of the granular opacities, resulting in diffuse lung opacity.
A normal film at 6 hours of age excludes the
presence of SDD.
One of the therapies for SDD is surfactant
administration. Surfactant can be administered
via nebulized or aerosol forms. It is administered
into the trachea via a catheter or an adapted
endotracheal tube. The administration of surfactant in neonates with SDD has been shown to be
associated with decreased oxygen and ventilator
setting requirements, decreased air-block complications, decreased incidence of intracranial
hemorrhage and bronchopulmonary dysplasia,
and decreased death rate. However, there is an
associated increased risk for development of
patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary hemorrhage, and there can be an acute desaturation
episode in response to surfactant administration.
Surfactant administration can be given on a
rescue basis when premature neonates develop
respiratory distress or can be given prophylactically in premature infants who are at risk.
Prophylactic administration is commonly given
immediately after birth and is becoming a more
common practice. In response to surfactant
administration, radiography may demonstrate
complete, central, or asymmetric clearing of
the findings of SDD (see Fig. 3-5). There is usually an increase in lung volumes. Neonates
without radiographic findings of a response to
surfactant have poorer prognoses than those
who have radiographic evidence of a response.
A pattern of alternating distended and collapsed
acini may create a radiographic pattern of bubblelike lucencies that can mimic pulmonary
interstitial emphysema. Knowledge of when
surfactant has been administered is helpful
in rendering accurate interpretation of chest
radiographs taken in the neonatal intensive
care unit (NICU).
-hemolytic (group B) streptococcal pneumonia
is the most common type of pneumonia in neonates. The infection is acquired during birth, and
at least 25% of women in labor are colonized by
the organism. Premature infants are more commonly infected than are term infants. In contrast
to the other types of neonatal pneumonias, the
radiographic findings include bilateral granular
opacities and low lung volumes (Fig. 3-6), the
identical findings in surfactant-deficient disease.
The presence of pleural fluid is a helpful differentiating factor because it is very uncommon in
surfactant deficiency but has been reported in
between 25% and 67% of cases of -hemolytic
streptococcal pneumonia.
Persistent pulmonary hypertension in the neonate, also referred to as persistent fetal circulation, is a term often used in the NICU and is
addressed here because it can be a source of
confusion. The high pulmonary vascular resistance that is normally present in the fetus typically decreases during the newborn period.
When this fails to happen, the pulmonary pressures remain abnormally high, and the condition
is referred to as persistent pulmonary hypertension. It is a physiologic finding rather than a specific disease. It can be a primary phenomenon or
it can occur secondary to causes of hypoxia,
such as meconium aspiration syndrome, neonatal pneumonia, or pulmonary hypoplasia associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
These patients are quite ill. The radiographic
patterns are variable and are more often
reflective of the underlying cause of hypoxia
than the presence of persistent pulmonary
hypertension.
One of the primary roles of chest radiography in
the NICU is to monitor support apparatus. They
include endotracheal tubes, enteric tubes, central
venous lines, umbilical arterial and venous catheters, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) catheters. The radiographic evaluation
of many of these tubes is the same as that seen
in adults and is not discussed here. When evaluating the positions of endotracheal tubes in premature neonates, it is important to consider that
the length of the entire tracheamay be only about
1 cm. Keeping the endotracheal tube in the exact
center of such a small trachea is an impossible
task for caregivers, and phone calls and reports
suggesting that the tube needs to be moved 2mm
proximally may be more annoying than helpful.
Direct phone communication may be more
appropriately reserved for times when the tube
is in a main bronchus or above the thoracic inlet.
There is an increased propensity to use esophageal intubation in neonates compared to its use in
adults. Although it would seem that esophageal
intubation would be incredibly obvious clinically, this is not always the case. I have seen
cases in which a child has in retrospect been discovered to have been esophageally intubated for
more than 24 hours. Therefore, the radiologist
may be the first to recognize esophageal intubation. Obviously, when the course of the endotracheal tube does not overlie the path of the
trachea, the use of esophageal intubation is
fairly obvious. Other findings of esophageal
intubation include a combination of low lung
volumes, gas within the esophagus, and gaseous
distention of the bowel (Fig. 3-7).
Umbilical arterial and venous catheters are commonly used in the NICU. Umbilical arterial
catheters pass from the umbilicus inferiorly
into the pelvis via the umbilical artery to the
iliac artery. The catheters then turn cephalad
within the aorta (see Fig. 3-5). These catheters
can be associated with thrombosis of the aorta
and its branches. Therefore, it is important to
avoid positioning the catheter with the tip at
the level of the branches of the aorta (celiac,
superior mesenteric, and renal arteries). There
are two acceptable umbilical arterial catheter
positions: high lines have their tips at the level
of the descending thoracic aorta (T8-T10; see
Fig. 3-9); low lines have their tips below the
level of L3 (see Fig. 3-5). The catheter tip
should not be positioned between T10 and L3
because of the risk for major arterial thrombosis.
There is no clear consensus as to whether a high
or a low umbilical artery catheter line is better,
and both positions are still currently used.
The pathway of the umbilical venous catheter is umbilical vein to left portal vein to ductus
venosus to hepatic vein to inferior vena cava
(Fig. 3-8). In contrast to umbilical arterial catheters, the course is in the superior direction from
the level of the umbilicus. The ideal position
of an umbilical venous catheter is with its tip
at the junction of the right atrium and the inferior
vena cava at the level of the hemidiaphragm
(see Figs. 3-4, 3-5). The umbilical venous catheter may occasionally deflect into the portal
venous system rather than passing into the
ductus venosus. Complications of such positioning can include hepatic hematoma or abscess.
One of the more common lines now seen in
children, as in adults, is peripherally inserted
central catheters (PICCs). In contrast to adults,
in whom some of the PICCs can be as large as
6F, the PICC lines used in children, particularly
infants, are often small in caliber (2F or 3F) so
that they can be placed into their very small
peripheral veins. These small caliber PICCs can
be very difficult to see on chest radiography, so
some of them must be filled with contrast to be
accurately visualized. The tip of the PICC line
that enters the child from the upper extremity
or scalp should be positioned with the tip in
the midlevel of the superior vena cava (see
Fig. 3-27). It is essential that PICC lines not be
left in place with the tip well into the right
atrium. Particularly with the small-caliber lines,
the atrium can be lacerated, leading to pericardial tamponade, free hemorrhage, or death.
Many such cases have been reported nationally.
Also, the PICC should not be too proximal in the
superior vena cava because the distal portion of
the line can flip from the superior vena cava into
the contralateral brachiocephalic or jugular vein.
At Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center,
the PICC lines are inserted in a dedicated interventional radiology suite by a team of nurses,
with supervision by pediatric interventional radiologists. Ultrasound is often used to guide vein
cannulation and certified Child Life Specialists
coach most kids through the procedure without
having to sedate them. Fluoroscopy is utilized at
the end of the procedure to adjust and document tip position in the mid-superior vena cava.
ECMO is a last-resort therapy usually reserved
for respiratory failure that has not responded to
other treatments. ECMO is essentially a prolonged form of circulatory bypass of the lungs
and is used only in patients who have reversible
disease and a chance for survival. The majority
of neonates who are treated with ECMO have
respiratory failure as a result of meconium
aspiration, persistent pulmonary hypertension
(resulting from a variety of causes), severe congenital heart disease, or congenital diaphragmatic hernia. ECMO seems to be used less
commonly now than it was in the 1990s.
There are two types of ECMO: arteriovenous
and venovenous. In ateriovenous ECMO, the
right common carotid artery and internal jugular
veins are sacrificed. The arterial catheter is
placed via the carotid and positioned with its
tip overlying the aortic arch. The venous catheter is positioned with its tip over the right atrium
(Fig. 3-9). One of the main roles of a chest radiograph of children on ECMO is to detect any
potential migration of the catheters. Careful
comparison with previous studies to make sure
that the catheters are not coming out or moving
too far in is critical. These patients have many
bandages and other items covering the external
portions of the catheters, so migration may be
hard to detect on physical examination. Note
that there are various radiographic appearances
of the ECMO catheters. Some catheters end
where the radiopaque portion of the tube
ends, and others have a radiolucent portion
with a small metallic marker at the tip (see Fig.
3-9). It is common to see white-out of the lungs
soon after a patient is placed on ECMO as
a result of decreased ventilator settings and
third-space shifting of fluid (see Fig. 3-9).
Patients on ECMO are anticoagulated and are
therefore at risk for hemorrhage.
High-frequency oscillators are commonly used
to treat neonates in the NICU. In contrast to conventional ventilation, high-frequency oscillators
use supraphysiologic rates of ventilation with
very low tidal volumes. Conventional ventilation
has been likened to delivering a cupful of air
approximately 20 times a minute. In contrast,
high-frequency oscillation is like delivering a
thimbleful of air approximately 1000 times per
minute. The air is vibrated in and out of the lung.
The mechanism of oscillators is poorly understood. In conventional ventilation, the diaphragm moves up and down, whereas during
high-frequency ventilation the diaphragm stays
parked at a certain anatomic level. This level can
be adjusted by changing the mean airway pressure of the oscillator. Caregivers usually like to
maintain the diaphragm at approximately the
level of the 10th posterior ribs. In general, the
radiographic appearance of neonatal pulmonary
diseases is not affected by whether the patient
is being ventilated by conventional or highfrequency ventilation.
As in adult intensive care units, major complications detected by chest radiographs include
those related to air-block complications, lobar
collapse, or acute diffuse pulmonary consolidation. Another type of complication seen in neonates is the development of bronchopulmonary
dysplasia. Imaging findings of lobar collapse and
air-block complications such as pneumothorax,
pneumomediastinum, and pneumopericardium
are similar in neonates and in adults. One type
of air-block complication that is unique to neonates is pulmonary interstitial emphysema.
In patients with severe surfactant deficiency,
ventilatory support can result in marked
increases in alveolar pressure, leading to perforation of alveoli. The air that escapes into the
adjacent interstitium and lymphatics is referred
to as pulmonary interstitial emphysema (PIE).
PIE appears on radiographs as bubblelike or
linear lucencies and can be focal or diffuse
(Fig. 3-10). The involved lung is usually noncompliant and is seen to have a static volume
on multiple consecutive films. The finding is typically transient. The importance of detecting PIE
is that it serves as a warning sign for other
impending air-block complications such as
pneumothorax, and its presence can influence
caregivers in decisions such as switching from
conventional to high-frequency ventilation.
It can be difficult to differentiate diffuse PIE
from the bubblelike lucencies that are associated
with developing bronchopulmonary dysplasia.
When encountering this scenario, the patient’s
age can help to determine which is more
likely. Most cases of PIE occur in the first week
of life, a time at which bronchopulmonary dysplasia is very unlikely. In patients older than
2 weeks, bronchopulmonary dysplasia is more
likely. Also, in patients who have undergone a
series of daily films, PIE may be noted to occur
abruptly, whereas bronchopulmonary dysplasia
tends to occur gradually. As previously mentioned, SDD partially treated by surfactant
replacement can cause a pattern of lucencies
that may mimic PIE as well.
Rarely, PIE can persist and develop into an
expansive, multicystic mass. The air cysts can
become large enough to cause mediastinal
shift and compromise pulmonary function.
Often, the diagnosis is indicated by sequential
radiography showing evolution of the cystic
mass from original findings typical of PIE. In
unclear cases, CT demonstrates that the air
cysts are in the interstitial space by showing
the bronchovascular bundles being positioned
within the center of the air cysts. The bronchovascular bundles appear as linear or nodular
densities in the center of the cysts.
Acute diffuse pulmonary consolidation is nonspecific in neonates, as it is in adults, and can
represent blood, pus, or water. In the neonate,
the specific considerations include edema,
which may be secondary to the development
of patent ductus arteriosus (Fig. 3-11); pulmonary hemorrhage, to which surfactant therapy
predisposes; worsening surfactant deficiency
(during the first several days of life but not
later); or developing neonatal pneumonia
(Table 3-2). Diffuse microatelectasis is another
possibility because neonates have the propensity to artifactually demonstrate diffuse lung
opacity on low lung volume films (expiratory
technique; Fig. 3-12A. B); this should not be mistaken for another cause of consolidation. Such
radiographs showing low lung volumes offer
little information concerning the pulmonary
status of the patient and should be repeated
when clinically indicated.
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is also
referred to as chronic lung disease of prematurity. It is a common complication seen in premature infants and is associated with significant
morbidity rates. It is uncommon in children
born at greater than 32 weeks of gestational
age, but it occurs in more than 50% of premature
infants born at less than 1000 g. BPD is the most
common chronic lung disease of infancy.
BPD is related to injury to the lungs that
is thought to result from some combination of
mechanical ventilation and oxygen toxicity.
Although four discrete and orderly stages of
the development of BPD were originally
described, they are not seen commonly and
are probably not important to know. BPD typically occurs in a premature infant who requires
prolonged ventilator support. At approximately
the end of the second week of life, persistent
hazy density appears throughout the lungs.
Over the next weeks to months, a combination
of coarse lung markings, bubblelike lucencies,
and asymmetric aeration can develop (Fig.
3-13). Eventually, focal lucencies, coarse reticular densities, and bandlike opacities develop.
In childhood survivors of BPD, many of these
radiographic findings decrease in prominence
over the years and only hyperaeration may persist. The radiographic findings may completely
resolve. Clinically, many children with severe
BPD during infancy may eventually improve
to normal pulmonary function or may only
have minor persistent problems such as exercise intolerance, predisposition to infection, or
asthma.
Wilson-Mikity syndrome is a confusing and
controversial term. It refers to the development
of BPD in the absence of mechanical ventilation.
Some people debate whether this disease exists,
whereas others think it is a variant of BPD.
Certainly, there are cases in which BPD findings
develop with minimal ventilator support or
develop earlier than is typically expected.
In contrast to diffuse pulmonary disease in newborns, focal masses can present with respiratory
distress due to compression of otherwise normal
lung. Most of these focal masses are related to
congenital lung lesions. Congenital lung lesions
may appear solid, as air-filled cysts, or mixed
in appearance. The differential for a focal lung
lesion can be separated on the basis of whether
the lesion is lucent or solid appearing on
chest radiography (Table 3-3). The most likely
considerations for a lucent chest lesion in a newborn are congenital lobar emphysema, congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation, persistent
pulmonary interstitial emphysema, and congenital diaphragmatic hernia. CT may be helpful
in differentiating among these lesions by
demonstrating whether the abnormal lucency
is related to air in distended alveoli, in the
interstitium, or in abnormal cystic structures.
Lesions that typically appear solid during the
neonatal period include sequestration and bronchogenic cyst. Many of these lesions can present
in children beyond the neonatal period,
and those aspects of these entities are also discussed here.
The following sections are divided into specific congenital lesions. However, it has been
increasingly recognized that there can be
‘‘mixed’’ lesions, which show characteristics of
more than one type of lesions (see Fig. 3-16).
The most common mixed lesions are those
that show characteristics of both congenital
cystic adenomatoid malformation and
sequestration.
It is also worth mentioning that there has
been a change in the way these lesions present
that is related to the increased use of prenatal
ultrasound and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. Historically, congenital lung lesions were
identified only when the infant became symptomatic. Many, if not most, of the congenital lung
lesions we currently see are picked up and followed through fetal life, with additional postnatal imaging obtained shortly after birth. A
significant number of these children are asymptomatic. This has raised issues related to when
and whether to perform surgical treatment in
infants with asymptomatic lesions.
Congenital lobar emphysema is related to overexpansion of alveoli, but the mechanism is
debated. Some reports suggest a ball-valve
type of anomaly in the bronchus leading to the
affected lung, which causes progressive air trapping. Most cases present with respiratory distress
during the neonatal period; 50% present within
the first month, and 75% present within the first
6 months of life. There can be associated
anomalies, usually cardiac, but they occur in the
minority of patients with congenital lobar
emphysema. There is a lobar predilection; the
most common site is the left upper lobe (43%),
followed by the right middle lobe (35%) and
right lower lobe (21%), with less than 1% in
each of the other lobes. On chest radiography,
a hyperlucent, hyperexpanded lobe is seen
(Fig. 3-14A, B). On initial radiographs, the
lesion may appear to be a soft tissue density
because of retained fetal lung fluid. This density
resolves and is replaced by progressive hyperlucency. On CT, the air is in the alveoli, so the
interstitial septa and bronchovascular bundles
are at the periphery (not the center) of the
lucency (see Fig. 3-14). The air spaces are
larger than those in the adjacent normal lung,
and the pulmonary vessels appear attenuated.
The treatment is lobectomy.
Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation
(CCAM) is a congenital adenomatoid proliferation that replaces normal alveoli. The majority
are detected prenatally or are present with respiratory distress at birth. Most involve only one
lobe and, in contrast to congenital lobar emphysema, there is no lobar predilection. CCAMs are
divided into three types on the basis of how
large the cysts appear at imaging or pathology.
Type 1 lesions (50%) have one or more large
(2 to 10 cm) cysts. Type 2 lesions (40%) have
numerous small cysts of uniform size. Type 3
lesions (10%) appear solid on gross inspection
and imaging but have microscopic cysts. There
are some who are now advocating the nomenclature congenital pulmonary airway malformation and a new classification with five subtypes.
Who are these people and don’t they have anything better to do?
The classification system has no clinical relevance except that it helps us remember that
CCAM can have multiple appearances when
imaged. The imaging appearance reflects the
type. CCAMs communicate with the bronchial
tree at birth and therefore fill with air within
the first hours to days of life. On radiography
and CT, a completely cystic, mixed cystic and
solid, or completely solid mass is seen depending on the number and size of cysts and whether
those cysts contain air or fluid (Figs. 3-15A-C,
3-16A-C). The management of symptomatic
CCAM is surgical resection. The management
of asymptomatic CCAM is currently somewhat
controversial. However, most caregivers advocate elective resection because these lesions
are at increased risk for infection and, rarely,
may develop malignancy.
A scenario encountered with increasing frequency is a prenatally diagnosed lung mass that
becomes less prominent on serial prenatal ultrasounds or MR examinations and demonstrates
only subtle findings or is not detected on a
chest radiograph obtained soon after birth.
Almost all such lesions are type 2 CCAMs and
demonstrate abnormalities on CT, even in light
of a normal chest radiograph.
Many CCAMs identified prenatally are followed with MR imaging (see Fig. 3-15), and
much has been learned about the nature of
these lesions. CCAMs tend to increase in size
until approximately 25 weeks of gestation. The
mass of the CCAMs then tends to regress over
time, sometimes dramatically. Compression of
the contralateral lung by a large mass and
development of fetal hydrops are associated
with high mortality rates. Fetal intervention
is typically reserved for cases with hydrops;
management options include dominant cyst
aspiration and fetal surgery with resection
of the lesion. Recently, trials using maternal
steroids have shown promise in shrinking
the CCAM volumes and avoiding other
interventions.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernias (CDHs) are
usually secondary to posterior defects in the
diaphragm (Bochdalek hernia) and are more
common on the left side by a ratio of 5 to 1.
Most infants with CDHs present at birth with
severe respiratory distress. The hernia may contain stomach, small bowel, colon, or liver.
The radiographic appearance depends on the
hernia contents and on whether there is air
within the herniated viscera. On initial radiographs, prior to the introduction of air into the
viscera, the appearance may be radiopaque.
Later, and more commonly, the herniated viscera contain air and the hernia appears as an
air-containing cystic mass. Less air-filled
viscera in the abdomen than expected and
an abnormal position of support apparatus,
such as a nasogastric tube within a herniated
stomach, are obvious clues that support the
diagnosis (Fig. 3-17). Often a nasogastric tube
becomes lodged at the esophagogastric junction
because of the acute turn in the herniated
stomach. This can be a supportive finding of
the diagnosis.
The diagnosis of CDH is commonly made
prenatally by ultrasound and further evaluated
by fetal MR imaging (Fig. 3-18A, B). The mortality rate for CDH is related to the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia. Systems of calculating
lung volumes and predicting mortality have
been devised for use with fetal ultrasound,
fetal MR imaging, and postnatal radiography.
Radiographic predictors of poor prognoses
include lack of aerated ipsilateral lung, low percentage of aerated contralateral lung, and severe
mediastinal shift. Treatment includes support of
respiratory failure, often by high-frequency ventilation or ECMO and surgical repair. The
reported mortality rates associated with CDH
range from 12% to 50%. One factor contributing
to mortality is the presence of associated
abnormalities, which are reported in a high percentage of infants born with CDH. One report
suggests that as many as 50% of patients with
CDH have associated congenital heart disease.
By the nature of the herniated bowel into the
chest, most patients with CDH have associated
malrotation.
The term pulmonary sequestration refers to an
area of congenital abnormal pulmonary tissue
that does not have a normal connection to the
bronchial tree. The characteristic imaging feature of sequestration is the demonstration of
an anomalous arterial supply to the abnormal
lung via a systemic artery arising from the
aorta (Fig. 3-19A-C). All modalities that can
demonstrate this abnormal systemic arterial
supply, including MR imaging, helical CT, ultrasound, and arteriography, have been advocated in making the diagnosis of sequestration.
However, contrast-enhanced helical CT is preferred because it both visualizes the systemic
arterial supply when a sequestration is present
(see Fig. 3-19) and further characterizes the
lung abnormality if a sequestration is not
present.
Sequestration most commonly presents with
recurrent pneumonia, usually in late childhood.
Other presentations include a prenatally diagnosed lung mass or respiratory distress in the
newborn period. Because sequestrations do
not communicate with the bronchial tree
unless they become infected, they usually
appear as radiopaque masses during the neonatal period. After infection has occurred, air may
be introduced and sequestration may appear as
a multiloculated cystic mass. The most common
location is within the left lower lobe.
There has been much discussion concerning differentiation between intralobar and extralobar sequestrations. Extralobar sequestrations
have a separate pleural covering, whereas intralobar sequestrations, which are more common,
do not; however, the presence or absence of an
extrapleural covering cannot be determined
at imaging. Extralobar sequestrations are associated with other abnormalities in 65% of
cases, whereas intralobar sequestrations are
not. Differences in venous drainage patterns
between intra- and extralobar sequestrations
have been emphasized as a differentiating factor but are actually variable with both types. The
differentiation between intra- and extralobar
sequestration cannot be made at imaging
and does not affect surgical management.
Visualization of the supplying systemic artery
is the characteristic finding and is the documentation the surgeons are looking for prior to
surgically removing the lesion.
Bronchogenic cysts occur secondary to abnormal
budding of the tracheobronchial tree during
development and occur in the lung
parenchyma or the middle mediastinum.
Mediastinal lesions are reportedly more
common, making up between 65% and 90%
of cases of bronchogenic cysts. When bronchogenic cysts occur in the lungs, they are most commonly central in location, often in a perihilar
distribution. Bronchogenic cysts are almost
always solitary lesions; multiple bronchogenic
cysts are very uncommon. Because of the propensity for middle mediastinal and perihilar
locations, compression of the distal trachea
or bronchi is not an uncommon presentation.
Air trapping in the lung distal to the lesion can
occur. Like sequestrations, they do not contain air
until they become infected and therefore may
appear as well-defined soft tissue attenuation or
cystic air-fluid-containing masses (see Fig. 2-11).
They can be quite large. They appear as
well-defined cystic structures on imaging (see
Fig. 2-11).
Respiratory tract infection is the most common
cause of illness in children and continues to be
a significant cause of morbidity and mortality.
Evaluation of suspected community-acquired
pneumonia is one of the most common indications for imaging in children. Because of the
frequency with which this scenario arises, knowledge of the issues concerning the imaging of children with community-acquired pneumonia is
important. The roles of imaging in these children
are multiple: confirmation or exclusion of pneumonia, characterization and prediction of infectious agents, exclusion of other cause of
symptoms, evaluation when there is failure to
resolve, and evaluation of related complications.
Making the diagnosis of pneumonia and consequently deciding on treatment and disposition
is a common but complex and difficult issue.
The symptoms and physical findings in children
with pneumonia are sometimes nonspecific,
especially in infants and young children. Many
children present with nonrespiratory symptoms,
such as fever, malaise, irritability, headaches,
chest pain, abdominal pain, vomiting, or
decreased appetite. Findings on physical examination are also less reliable in children than in
adults because young children are less cooperative with exams and have smaller anatomy and
smaller respiratory cycles. Because of the inaccuracy of physical examination, radiography
is often requested to evaluate children with suspected pneumonia. Several studies have shown
that in a large percentage of cases, findings on
chest radiography change caregivers’ diagnoses
and treatment plans (antibiotics, bronchodilators, and patient disposition) for children being
evaluated for potential pneumonia. At our institution, we obtain both a frontal and a lateral film
in the evaluation of a child with suspected pneumonia. It has been shown that obtaining both
views increases the negative predictive value
of chest radiography for pneumonia. In addition,
some findings such as hyperinflation in an infant
are much more easily evaluated on the lateral
than on the frontal views (Fig. 3-20A, B).
The historic emphasis in textbooks and articles
concerning pneumonia has been on radiographic patterns that suggest a specific infectious
agent, such as staphylococcal or streptococcal
pneumonia. However, because of the limited
ways in which the lung can respond to inflammation, findings suggestive of a specific diagnosis are usually not encountered in the
radiograph of a child with suspected community-acquired pneumonia. The more general issue
in the evaluation of suspected pneumonia is
whether the infectious agent is likely to be
bacteria or viral, which determines whether
the patient should be placed on antibiotics.
To answer this question it is helpful to review
the epidemiology of lower respiratory infections
in children, the classic radiographic patterns
of viral and bacterial pneumonia in children,
and what is known about the accuracy of chest
radiography in differentiating viral from bacterial
infection.
The common causal agents of lower respiratory tract infections in children vary greatly
with age. In all age groups, viral infections
are much more common than bacterial infections. In infants and preschool-age children
(4 months to 5 years of age), viruses cause
95% of all lower respiratory tract infections.
The epidemiology is much different in schoolage children (6 to 16 years of age). In school-age
children, although viral agents remain the most
common cause of lower respiratory tract infections, the incidence of bacterial infection by
Streptococcus pneumoniae increases. What is
most striking is that Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
which is an uncommon cause of pneumonia in
preschool infants and children, is the cause of
approximately 30% of lower respiratory tract
infections in school-age children. Therefore,
the odds that a child should be administered
antibiotics for a respiratory tract infection are
greatly influenced by the child’s age. In addition,
there has been a recent increase in the incidence
of pneumonia secondary to multidrug-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus infections. These can
occur at any age.
Viral infections affect the airways, causing
inflammation of the small airways and peribronchial edema. This peribronchial edema appears
on radiography as increased peribronchial opacities—symmetric course markings that radiate
from the hila into the lung (Fig. 3-21A, B; and
see Fig. 3-20A, B). The central portions of the
lungs appear to be ‘‘dirty’’ or ‘‘busy.’’ It is one
of the most subjective findings in radiology.
In addition, the combination of the bronchial
wall edema, narrowed airway lumen, and
necrotic debris and mucus in the airway leads
to small airway occlusion. This results in both
hyperinflation and areas of subsegmental atelectasis. Hyperinflation is evident on chest
radiographs in children in the presence of
hyperlucency, the depression of the hemidiaphragm to more than 10 posterior ribs, and the
increased anterior-to-posterior chest diameter.
Hyperinflation is often much better appreciated
on lateral than on frontal radiographs in infants
and small children (see Fig. 3-20). Subsegmental
atelectasis appears as wedge-shaped areas of
density, most commonly in the lower and mid
lung (see Fig. 3-20A, B). There are several anatomic differences that render small children
more predisposed to air trapping and collapse
secondary to viral infection than adults: small
airway luminal diameter, poorly developed collateral pathways of ventilation, and more abundant mucus production. The misinterpretation
of areas of atelectasis as focal opacities suspicious for bacterial pneumonia is thought to be
one of the more common misinterpretations
in pediatric radiology.
In contrast to the airway involvement in
viral pneumonia, bacterial pneumonia occurs
secondary to inhalation of the infectious agent
into the air spaces. There is a resultant progressive development of inflammatory exudate
and edema within the acini, resulting in consolidation of the air spaces. On chest radiography,
localized air space consolidation (Fig. 3-22)
occurs with air bronchograms. The typical distribution is either lobar or segmental, depending
on when in the course of development of
the pneumonia the radiograph is obtained.
Associated pleural effusions are not uncommon.
Also, there is a propensity for pneumonia to
appear ‘‘round’’ in younger children (Fig. 3-23).
Round pneumonia is more common in children
younger than 8 years of age and is most often
caused by S. pneumoniae. The occurrence
of this pattern is thought to be related to
poor development of pathways of collateral
ventilation. Round pneumonia tends to be solitary and occurs more commonly posteriorly and
in the lower lobes. When such a lung mass is
seen in a child with cough and fever, round
pneumonia should be suspected. The child
should be treated with antibiotics and the chest
radiograph repeated. It is best to avoid unnecessary CT examination in this clinical scenario.
When a round opacity is seen in a child older
than 8 years of age, other pathology should be
suspected.
Do these classic patterns of viral and
bacterial infections accurately differentiate
between children who have bacterial infection
and need antibiotics and those who do not?
Studies have shown that these radiographic
patterns do have a high negative predictive
value (92%) for excluding bacterial pneumonia. But the positive predictive value is low
(30%). In other words, 70% of children who
have radiographic findings of bacterial infection actually have viral infection. In regard
to decisions about administering antibiotics to
children with suspected pneumonia, the goals
are to treat all children who have bacterial
pneumonia with antibiotics while minimizing
the treatment of children with viral illnesses.
Therefore, the high negative predictive value
of chest radiography for bacterial pneumonia
is useful in identifying those children who do
not need antibiotics.
Many of the presenting symptoms of pneumonia
in children are nonspecific, and the spectrum
of presentations overlaps with a number of
other pathologic processes involving the chest
or other anatomic regions. Therefore, one of
the other roles of chest radiography in the evaluation of a child who potentially has pneumonia
is the exclusion of other processes. Two areas
that are often blind spots for radiologists and
may be involved by conditions that mimic pneumonia are the airway and the chest wall.
Processes that cause extrinsic compression of
the trachea and bronchi can mimic pneumonia
by causing noisy breathing, lobar collapse, and
recurrent infection. Evaluation of the diameter
of the airway should be stressed as a routine
part of evaluating radiographs. Rib abnormalities
may be evidence that a lung opacity seen on
chest radiography does not represent pneumonia. The presence of rib erosion or asymmetric
intercostal spaces helps to differentiate neuroblastoma from chest opacity secondary to
pneumonia.
Unlike in adults, in whom postobstructive pneumonia secondary to bronchogenic carcinoma is
a concern, follow-up radiography to ensure resolution of radiographic findings is not routinely
necessary in an otherwise healthy child. There is
a tendency to obtain follow-up radiographs both
too early and too often. Follow-up radiographs
should be reserved for children who have
persistent or recurrent symptoms and those
who have an underlying condition such as
immunodeficiency. The radiographic findings
of pneumonia can persist for 2 to 4 weeks,
even when the patient is recovering appropriately clinically. When follow-up radiographs
are indicated, it is ideal to avoid obtaining
them until at least 2 to 3 weeks have passed, if
clinical symptoms allow.
Causes of failure of suspected pneumonia to
resolve include infected developmental lesions,
bronchial obstruction, gastroesophageal reflux
and aspiration, and underlying systemic disorders. The most common developmental lung
masses that may become infected and present
as recurrent or persistent pulmonary infection
include sequestration and cystic adenomatoid
malformation. These entities have been discussed previously.
The evaluation of complications related to pneumonia can be divided into several clinical scenarios: primary evaluation of parapneumonic
effusions, evaluation of a child who has persistent or progressive symptoms despite medical
or surgical therapy, and the chronic sequelae
of pneumonia.
Parapneumonic effusions occur commonly in
patients who have bacterial pneumonia. Multiple
therapeutic options are available in the management of parapneumonic effusions, including
antibiotic therapy alone, repeated thoracentesis,
chest tube placement, thrombolytic therapy,
and thoracoscopy with surgical débridement.
Great differences in opinion exist among caregivers regarding the timing and aggressiveness
of management of parapneumonic effusions.
Traditionally, the aggressiveness of therapy has
been based on categorizing parapneumonic effusions as empyema or transudative effusion as
determined by needle aspiration and analysis of
the pleural fluid.
Several imaging modalities have been advocated to differentiate empyema from transudative effusion without the use of an invasive
diagnostic thoracentesis, including decubitus
radiographs, ultrasound, and CT. If there is a
significant change in the position and appearance of the pleural fluid on the decubitus
images as compared to the upright radiograph,
the fluid is considered to be free flowing and
nonloculated. If there is no change in position
of the pleural fluid, the fluid is considered to be
loculated (Fig. 3-24A-C). In my experience,
these decubitus radiographs have been more
confusing than helpful, and we do not advocate
the use of decubitus radiographs to evaluate
pleural effusions at our institution. On CT, findings such as thickening or enhancement of the
parietal pleura and thickening or increased
attenuation of the extrapleural fat were previously thought to favor empyema over transudative effusion, but this has been shown to be
inaccurate (Fig. 3-25A, B; and see Fig. 3-29).
Ultrasound has also been advocated as an aid
in making therapeutic decisions for parapneumonic effusions. In one study, parapneumonic
effusions were categorized as low grade (anechoic fluid without internal heterogeneous echogenic structures) or high grade (fibrinopurulent
organization demonstrated by the presence
of fronds, septations, or loculations) (see Figs.
3-24, 3-25). In children in whom effusions
were high grade, hospital stay was reduced
by nearly 50% when operative intervention
was performed. The length of hospital stay in
children with low-grade effusions was not
affected by operative intervention. Therefore,
ultrasound may play a more useful role than
CT in the early evaluation of parapneumonic
effusions. It is not uncommon for ultrasound
to show multiple septations and in the same
case to show no evidence of septations on CT
(see Fig. 3-25). We currently advocate ultrasound, rather than CT or decubitus radiographs,
in the primary evaluation of parapneumonic
effusions.
When children exhibit persistent or progressive
symptoms (fever, respiratory distress, sepsis)
despite appropriate medical management of
pneumonia, there is commonly an underlying
suppurative complication. Potential suppurative
complications include parapneumonic effusions
such as empyema, inadequately drained effusions, and persistent effusion due to malpositioned chest tube; parenchymal complications,
such as cavitary necrosis or lung abscess; and
purulent pericarditis. Although chest radiography is the primary imaging modality for detecting such complications, a significant percentage
of them are not demonstrated by radiography.
In a child who has had a noncontributory radiograph and who has not responded appropriately
to therapy, contrast-enhanced CT has been
shown to be useful in detecting clinically significant suppurative complications. CT can help
to differentiate whether there is a pleural or a
parenchymal reason for persistent illness.
Administration of intravenous contrast is vital
to maximize the likelihood of detection and
the characterization of both parenchymal and
pleural complications.
On contrast-enhanced CT, both noncompromised consolidated lung parenchyma and
atelectasis enhance diffusely. Large areas of
decreased or absent enhancement are indicative
of underlying parenchymal ischemia or impending infarction. Suppurative lung parenchymal
complications include a spectrum of abnormalities, such as cavitary necrosis, lung abscess,
pneumatocele, bronchopleural fistula, and pulmonary gangrene. The name given to the suppurative process is determined by several
factors, including the severity, distribution, condition of the adjacent lung parenchyma, and
temporal relationship with disease resolution.
Lung abscess represents a dominant focus
of suppuration surrounded by a well-formed
fibrous wall. Lung abscess is actually uncommon
in otherwise healthy children and typically
occurs in children who are immunocompromised. On contrast-enhanced CT, lung abscesses
appear as fluid- or air-filled cavities with definable enhancing walls (Fig. 3-26). Typically, there
is no evidence of necrosis in the surrounding
lung. Pneumatocele is a term given to thinwalled cysts seen at imaging and may represent
a later or less severe stage of resolving or healing
necrosis (Fig. 3-27A-C).
Cavitary necrosis is the most commonly
encountered suppurative complication. It is
characterized by a dominant area of necrosis
of a consolidated lobe that is associated with a
variable number of thin-walled cysts (Fig. 3-28).
CT findings of cavitary necrosis include loss
of normal lung architecture, decreased parenchymal enhancement, loss of the lung-pleural
margin, and multiple thin-walled cavities containing air or fluid and lacking an enhancing
border (Fig. 3-29). Although historically
described as a complication of staphylococcal
pneumonia, cavitary necrosis was much more
commonly seen as a complication of streptococcal pneumonia during the last decade. Cavitary
necrosis in association with multi-drug-resistant
S. aureus infection has been occurring with
increased frequency recently (see Fig. 3-27).
The presence of cavitary necrosis is indicative
of an intense and prolonged illness. However,
unlike in adults in whom the mortality rate in
cavitary necrosis is high, and early surgical
removal of the affected lung has been advocated, the long-term outcome for children with
cavitary necrosis is favorable in most cases with
medical management alone. It is amazing that in
children with cavitary necrosis, follow-up radiographs obtained more than 40 days after the
acute illness are most often normal or show
only minimal scarring.
It may sometimes be difficult on a single
imaging study to differentiate a suppurative
lung parenchymal complication of pneumonia
from an underlying cystic congenital lung
lesion that has become secondarily infected.
Infected congenital cystic adenomatoid malformations may appear very similar to cavitary
necrosis. Obviously, historical imaging studies
showing a lack of a cystic lesion exclude
underlying CCAM, but such historical examinations often do not exist or are not available.
Observable resolution of the cystic lesion on
follow-up studies ensures that the lesion is no
longer clinically relevant and makes cavitary
necrosis much more likely. However, some
CCAMs have been reported to scar down and
resolve after becoming infected.
Acute pneumonia can lead to parenchymal
damage and long-term sequelae. The most
common sequelae of acute pneumonia are
bronchiectasis and Swyer-James syndrome.
Bronchiectasis is enlargement of the diameter
of the bronchi that is related to damage to the
bronchial walls. It is best demonstrated by highresolution CT, where the diagnostic finding
is that the bronchus in question is larger in
diameter than the adjacent pulmonary artery
(Fig. 3-30). Swyer-James syndrome is characterized by unilateral lung hyperlucency that is
thought to be secondary to a virus-induced necrotizing bronchiolitis that leads to an obliterative
bronchiolitis (see Fig. 3-30). Radiography shows
a hyperlucent and enlarged lung with a static
lung volume. The pulmonary vessels are less
prominent than on the normal side.
The incidence of tuberculosis in children has
been increasing. Children with primary tuberculosis can present with pulmonary consolidation
within any lobe. It is often associated with
hilar lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion.
Therefore, when lung consolidation is seen
with associated lymphadenopathy or effusion
in a child who is not acutely ill, there should
be a high suspicion for tuberculosis. Most of
the cases of pulmonary tuberculosis that I have
seen have demonstrated unilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (Fig. 3-31A, B). Such cases
should be considered tuberculosis until proven
otherwise.
In children with certain underlying conditions,
the clinical scenarios and differential diagnoses
differ greatly from those seen in the general
population. Commonly encountered scenarios
include the evaluation of pneumonia in immunocompromised children, acute chest syndrome
in children with sickle cell anemia, and pulmonary complications in children with cystic
fibrosis.
Children can be immunocompromised for a
variety of reasons, including cancer therapy,
bone marrow transplantation, solid organ transplantation, primary immunodeficiency, and
AIDS. This is a population that continues to
increase. Acute pulmonary processes are a
common cause of morbidity and mortality in
these patients. As with immunocompetent children, radiography is the primary modality used
to confirm or exclude pneumonia. However,
because many of the chest radiographs obtained
in these children are portable and because of the
consequences of missing an infection, CT plays
a greater role in evaluating for an acute pulmonary process when chest radiographs are noncontributory. I would guess that in many tertiary
institutions the number of chest CTs obtained
in immunocompromised children is greater
than the number of those obtained in immunocompetent children.
In immunocompetent children, the main
question is whether a pulmonary process
is viral or bacterial; in immunocompromised
children, there are many more possible causes
of acute pulmonary processes They include
alveolar hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, drug
reaction, idiopathic pneumonia, lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis, bronchiolitis obliterans,
bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia, and chronic graft-versus-host disease.
The CT findings for many of these entities are
overlapping and nonspecific. A clinical question
often posed is this: Is there evidence of fungal
infection? The hallmark CT finding indicating
fungal infection is the presence of nodules
(Figs. 3-32A, B, 3-33). They are commonly clustered and may exhibit poorly defined margins,
cavitation, or a surrounding halo that has the
opacity of ground glass. However, many of
these findings are also nonspecific. In these
cases CT does aid in directing potential interventions, such as bronchoscopy or percutaneous
lung biopsy, to high yield areas.
Children with sickle cell anemia can develop
acute chest syndrome, which is manifested
by fever, chest pain, hypoxia, and pulmonary
opacities on chest radiographs (Fig. 3-34).
Acute chest syndrome is much more common
in children than adults with sickle cell anemia.
It occurs most commonly between 2 and 4
years of age and is the leading cause of death
(25% of deaths) and the second most common
cause of hospitalization in those affected with
sickle cell anemia. Although it is debated
whether the cause of such episodes is more
often related to infection or infarction, many
believe the lung opacities are related to rib
infarction, splinting, and subsequent areas
of atelectasis. Radiography often shows segmental to lobar pulmonary opacities but can also be
normal. There can be an associated increase
in cardiomegaly. Bone scans may show rib
infarcts. The children are treated with oxygen,
antibiotics, and pain control, and the pulmonary
opacities are commonly monitored by
radiography.
Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease that most commonly affects the respiratory and gastrointestinal
tracts. In the respiratory system, abnormally viscous mucus leads to airway obstruction and
infection that causes bronchitis and bronchiectasis. Children may initially present with recurrent
respiratory tract infections. Radiography may be
normal at young ages but eventually demonstrates hyperinflation, increased peribronchial
markings, mucus plugging, and bronchiectasis.
The hilar areas can become prominent because
of a combination of lymphadenopathy secondary to the chronic inflammation and enlarged
central pulmonary arteries related to the development of pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Chest radiography is used to monitor the disease
and evaluate for complications during acute
exacerbations. Such complications include
focal pneumonia, pneumothorax, and pulmonary hemorrhage. To monitor the progression
of disease, some institutions use high-resolution
CT, which demonstrates findings such as bronchiectasis and bronchial wall thickening in
greater detail and earlier than does radiography
(Fig. 3-35).
One of the more common indications for highresolution CT in the pediatric population is questioned chronic aspiration. Often this issue arises
in children with neurologic abnormalities such
as cerebral palsy or chronic tracheotomy tubes
when decisions about methods of feeding are
being entertained. High-resolution CT findings
of chronic aspiration include bronchiectasis,
tree-in-bud opacities (Fig. 3-36A, B), and
increased interstitial linear opacities. Findings
more often occur in lower lobes.
There is a greater component of cartilage than
bone within the chest walls of children, so there
is more compliance than there is in the chest
walls of adults. Because of this increased compliance, the sequelae of trauma to the pediatric
chest are unique in several ways. First, the incidence of rib fractures after high-speed motor
vehicle accidents is lower in children than in
adults. Second, the deceleration forces of high
speed collisions are more likely to be dispersed
into the lung in children, resulting in lung contusion. Children with lung contusions have been
shown to have higher morbidity and mortality
rates than those without lung contusions.
Although chest CT is not commonly performed
to evaluate for lung contusion, the lower lungs
are often seen on CT when it is performed to
evaluate for abdominal trauma. Characteristic
findings in lung contusion on CT include nonsegmental distribution, posterior location, crescent shape, and mixed confluent and nodular
characteristics (Fig. 3-37). In children with
small lung contusions, the compliance of the
chest wall can result in a rim of nonopacified
lung between the consolidated contusion and
the adjacent ribs seen on CT (see Fig. 3-37).
This subpleural sparing can be helpful in differentiating lung contusion from other causes of
lung opacification. The CT finding that classifies
an opacified area as a lung laceration rather
than a lung contusion is the presence of a
fluid- or air-filled cyst within the opacified lung
(Fig. 3-38A, B; and see Fig. 3-37). These cystic
spaces result from torn lung.
Finally, the sites of rib fracture in children
differ from those in adults. Rib fractures in young
children in the absence of an obvious traumatic
event are highly suspicious for child abuse Figs.
3-39, 3-40A, B). Pediatric rib fractures are more
likely to be posterior than lateral. In child abuse,
as a result of squeezing an infant’s thorax, the
posterior ribs can be excessively levered at
the costotransverse process articulation, causing
posterior fracture at this site. In the appropriately
aged child, these findings are considered
pathognomonic for child abuse.
The incidence of aortic injury is also much
lower in children than in adults. This, in combination with the lower incidence of obesity
in children as compared to adults, makes the
uncleared mediastinum on a chest radiograph
after trauma a much less common scenario
in children than in adults. Otherwise, the use
of CT and angiography and the imaging findings
of aortic injuries are no different from those
encountered in adults.
The aspiration of the hydrocarbons in gasoline,
furniture polish, kerosene, or lighter fluid when
young children get into and drink such liquids
can cause a combination of chemical
pneumonitis and atelectasis secondary to surfactant destruction. Radiographic findings may not
manifest for up to 12 hours after ingestion.
However, a normal radiograph at 24 hours
after suspected ingestion excludes significant
aspiration. The lung opacities tend to be in the
lung bases (Fig. 3-41) and may persist for weeks
after clinical improvement. Pneumatoceles are
not uncommon sequelae.
The mediastinum is the most common location
of primary thoracic masses in children. Also, the
majority of mediastinal masses occur in children
rather than in adults. As in adults, characterizing
the location of the mass as anterior, middle, or
posterior mediastinal can focus the differential
diagnosis of mediastinal masses (Table 3-4).
By far the most commonly encountered issues in
the anterior mediastinum are the normal thymus
mistaken as a mass and lymphoma. There are a
large number of other potential but much less
common causes of anterior mediastinal masses
in children. They include teratoma (and other
germ cell tumors), thymoma, multilocular
thymic cysts seen in association with AIDS,
and thyroid enlargement and heterogeneity
(often with calcifications) in Langerhan cell histiocytosis (in which lung cysts are also present;
Fig. 3-42).
One of the most common areas of confusion in
the imaging of children is related to differentiating the normal thymus from pathologic
processes. This confusion led to thymic radiation therapy in the first half of the 20th century,
when children with a normal prominent thymus
on chest radiography were radiated because of
the erroneous belief that a big thymus compressed the airway and predisposed to death.
Distinguishing the normal thymus from disease
continues to cause diagnostic problems today,
particularly for those who do not often image
children.
In children, the thymus has a variable
appearance in both size and shape. In children
less than 5 years of age, and particularly in
infants, the thymus can appear to be very large
(Fig. 3-43). Large thymuses are said to be more
common in boys. The thymus also has variable
configurations. A number of names have
become associated with normal variations in
the thymus, such as the sail sign (Fig. 3-44),
which refers to a triangular extension of the
thymus, most commonly to the right, on frontal
chest radiography. It resembles a sail. This
should not be confused with the spinnaker sail
sign (Fig. 3-45), which is an indication of pneumomediastinum, in which the abnormally
located air lifts the thymus up so it looks like
the sail on the front of a racing boat. Between
5 and 10 years of age, the thymus becomes
less prominent radiographically because of
the disproportionately decreased growth of the
thymus in relationship to the growth of the rest
of the body. During a child’s second decade,
the thymus should not be visualized as a discrete
anterior mediastinal mass on chest radiography.
Abnormality of the thymus (or anterior mediastinum) is suspected when the thymic silhouette has an abnormal shape or an abnormal size
in relationship to the patient’s age. Displacement
or compression of the airway or other structures
is suspicious for abnormality. CT, ultrasound,
MR imaging, and fluoroscopy can be used
to help differentiate the normal thymus from
an abnormal mass, but CT is probably used
most commonly. When CT is performed to evaluate suspicious cases, the normal thymus
should appear homogeneous in attenuation,
typically is quadrilateral in shape in young
children (Fig. 3-46) and triangular in teenagers
(Fig. 3-47A, B), and may have slightly convex
margins. Heterogeneity, calcification, and displacement or compression of the airway or
vascular structures indicate an abnormality
(Fig 3-48A-D; and see Fig. 3-42). True pathologic
masses of the thymus are actually quite rare
in children.
Thymic rebound is another source of confusion concerning normal thymic tissue. After a
patient has ceased receiving chemotherapy for
a malignancy, it is normal for the thymus to grow
back, as seen in serial CT examinations. Thymic
volume has been shown to vary cyclically by as
much as 40% during rounds of chemotherapy
(see Fig. 3-47). This intervallic increase in soft
tissue attenuation in the anterior mediastinum
should not be considered abnormal when
encountered on cross-sectional imaging.
Lymphoma is the third most common tumor
in children, exceeded only by leukemia and
brain tumors. It is by far the most common
abnormal anterior mediastinal mass in children,
particularly in older children and teenagers.
Therefore, lymphoma is the working diagnosis
for newly diagnosed anterior mediastinal masses
in children. Age is helpful in differentiating
a normal thymus from lymphoma because
a normal thymus is most common in small children and lymphoma is most common in teenagers. The most problematic case is the slightly
prominent anterior mediastinum in a 10year-old. One helpful clue in identifying lymphoma is that mediastinal lymphoma is commonly
associated with cervical lymphadenopathy.
The most common types of lymphoma
that involve the mediastinum include Hodgkin
lymphoma and the lymphoblastic type of nonHodgkin lymphoma. Both lesions can appear
as discrete lymph nodes or as a conglomerate
mass of lymph nodes, most commonly within
the anterior mediastinum (see Fig. 3-48).
Lung involvement, when present, is usually
contiguous with mediastinal and hilar disease.
Calcifications are rare in untreated lymphoma
and when present should raise the
possibility of other diagnoses such as teratoma
(Fig. 3-50).
Most mediastinal masses are initially identified on chest radiography and then further evaluated by CT, which confirms the presence of an
anterior mediastinal mass, evaluates the extent
of disease, and evaluates for potential complications. The potential complications related to
mediastinal lymphoma include airway compression, compressive obstruction of venous structures (superior vena cava, pulmonary veins),
and pericardial effusion (see Figs. 3-48, 3-49).
Airway compression is especially important
because it may influence decisions concerning
surgical biopsy with general anesthesia versus
percutaneous biopsy with local anesthesia. If a
patient cannot lie recumbent for CT imaging
because of airway compression, the images
can usually be obtained with the patient positioned prone because the anterior mediastinal
mass falls away from the airway. Compression
of the airway by more than 50% from the
expected round shape has been shown to be
associated with a high risk for complications
related to anesthesia. Because of this, some
such mediastinal masses are biopsied using
ultrasound guidance and local anesthesia.
Middle mediastinal masses are less common
than anterior or posterior mediastinal masses
and are usually related to lymphadenopathy or
duplication cysts. Lymphadenopathy can be
inflammatory, most often secondary to granulomatous disease, such as tuberculosis or fungal
infection; or to neoplastic growth secondary to
metastatic disease or lymphoma. Duplication
cysts can be bronchogenic (see Fig. 2-11), enteric,
or neurenteric. Duplication cysts are well-defined
masses that appear cystic on cross-sectional
imaging. Neurenteric cysts, by definition, have
associated vertebral anomalies. Pathologic processes related to the esophagus can also cause
middle mediastinal abnormalities. Chronic foreign bodies can erode through the esophagus
and cause a middle mediastinal mass, typically
in the cervical esophagus at the level of the thoracic inlet (Fig. 3-51A, B). A dilatated esophagus
resulting from achalasia or a hiatal hernia may
also appear as a middle mediastinal mass on
chest radiography.

There are a number of causes of posterior mediastinal masses in children. They include neural
crest tumor, neurofibroma, lateral menigocele,
diskitis, hematoma, and extramedullary hematopoiesis. However, just as anterior mediastinal
masses in older children are considered to be
lymphoma, the working diagnosis for posterior
mediastinal masses in young children is neuroblastoma until proven otherwise.
Neurogenic tumors (neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, ganglioneuroma) are the most
common posterior mediastinal masses in childhood. Neuroblastoma is discussed in detail in
the genitourinary section. Approximately 15%
of neuroblastomas occur in the posterior mediastinum, most occurring before a child is 2 years
of age.
Most neuroblastomas are visible on frontal
radiographs of the chest as a posterior opacity.
The soft tissue mass is often surprisingly poorly
visualized on the lateral view. There is frequently erosion, destruction, or splaying of the
adjacent posterior ribs (Fig. 3-52A-D). These
findings may be subtle, so whenever a posterior
chest opacity is identified an effort should be
made to look for rib erosion. The neuroforamina
may appear enlarged on the lateral view, secondary to intraspinal extension of the tumor.
Calcifications are reported to be visible on
chest radiography in as many as 25% of cases,
although in my experience it is less than that.
Cross-sectional imaging with CT or MR imaging
confirms the presence of the tumor and evaluates extent of disease, particularly whether there
is intraspinal extension. Thoracic neuroblastomas have better prognosis than abdominal
neuroblastomas.
A number of primary malignant processes can
arise in the chest walls of children. They include
Ewing sarcoma, Askin tumor (primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the chest wall), and other sarcomas (Fig. 3-53). Most of these lesions present
with painful enlargement of the chest wall.
Metastatic involvement by neuroblastoma, lymphoma, or leukemia is actually more common
than are primary tumors. On imaging, all of
these malignancies typically appear as
nonspecific aggressive lesions with poorly
defined margins that include bony destruction
and pleural involvement. However, one must
consider that as much as one third of children
have variations in the configuration of the anterior chest wall, including asymmetric findings,
such as tilted sternum (Fig. 3-54), prominent
convexity of anterior rib or costal cartilage,
prominent asymmetric costal cartilage, parachondral nodules, or mild degrees of pectus
excavatum or carinatum. It is common for
these asymmetric variants to be palpated by
the pediatrician, parent, or patient, and because
of the fear of malignancy, cross-sectional imaging is requested. In a previous study that
reviewed CT and MR examinations performed
to evaluate children with suspected chest wall
masses, all of the palpable lesions that were
asymptomatic were related to normal anatomic
variations. Knowledge that such variations are
common should be communicated to referring
physicians and parents when imaging is being
contemplated in a child with an asymptomatic
chest wall ‘‘lump.’’
One of the most common abnormalities in
chest wall configuration is pectus excavatum.
Although the majority of associated problems
due to this deformity are cosmetic, pectus deformities can cause chest pain, fatigue, dyspnea
on exertion, palpitations, and restrictive lung disease. When the deformities are severe, surgical
repair can be performed. Pectus excavatum
is commonly treated by a minimally invasive
procedure called a Nuss procedure. Prior to
the Nuss procedure, surgeons commonly
request CT examination to document the
Haller index, which quantifies the severity of
the pectus deformity (Fig. 3-55). To calculate
the Haller index, low tube current (mA) images
are obtained through the level of the greatest
degree of pectus deformity. The Haller index
is equal to the transverse left-to-right diameter
of the chest, divided by the anterior-to-posterior
diameter. The greater the Haller index, the
more severe the pectus. A patient with a Haller
index greater than 3.2 is considered a surgical
candidate.
